1
Credible Communication – Perspective and Thoughts1
(Padma Bhushan Professor  Emeritus  Dr. M.V. Pylee  Memorial  Lecture - delivered  by Shri M. Rajeshwar
Rao,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of India on Monday,  February  26, 2024,  at the School  of
Management  Studies;  Cochin  University  of Science and Technology,  Kochi)
Dr. P.G. Sankaran,  Vice Chancellor,  CUSAT;  Dr. Jagathy Raj, Director,  School  of
Management  Studies;  faculty  members,  students,  ladies,  and gentlemen,
At the outset,  let me thank Dr. Jagathy  Raj for inviting  to deliver  this memorial
lecture in the memory  of Dr. M.V. Pylee.  I cherish this gesture from my alma  mater
to deliver  this talk and it is indeed  an honour  and privilege  to do so. Padma
Bhushan  Dr. M. V. Pylee was a distinguished  figure in the field of management
and administration  who enriched  the field of management  education  in not only
Kerala but across the country with his scholarly work.  He made significant
contributions  to the society through his thought  leadership and academi c
endeavour  and with his enduring legacy . Dr. Pylee's leadership as a Management
Guru  and as the Director  of the School  of Management  Studies,  CUSAT,
contributed significantly to the development  of management  education  in Kerala.
His vision  and guidance helped  establish several  institutions  as centers of
excellence in management  studies.  Unfortunately,  I did not have an opportunity  to
directly  interact  with Dr. Pylee as he demitted  office  of Director  before I joined  SMS,
1 Inputs  provided by Pradeep  Kumar  and Saurabh Pratap Singh are gratefully  acknowledged.
2 but I have benefitted  from his ideal s and vision,  having completed  my MBA  from
SMS  in the year 1982.
Having  put in about  four decades in the Central Bank , I can certainly testify  to the
fact that academic  research  and insights  are extremely  useful  for enlightened
public  discourse and have  potential to alter the path of policy  actions.  Embracing
the philosophy of Dr. Pylee that investing  in the skills  and knowledge  is the most
important  requirement  for progress,  during  the course of my address  today,  I wish
to share my perspectives on the transformational  journey  and progress  witnessed
in the Indian  financial  system  and emphasize  on the need  for skill building to
survive,  sustain,  and succeed  during  this transformation.
A changing  banking  landscape,  digitalisation  of financial  services,  new
business  models,  emergence of FinTech  and technological  progress are
transforming financial sector  in fundamental  ways. This trend  has been
pronounced over the last decade.  The busines s of banking  has transformed  with
the strategic  focus  of services shifting  beyond traditional financial  offerings  of
banking services to offering  up a suite  of products including  wealth management
and other  financial  products.
What  this means is that that the financial  institutions  would  need to
continuously reinvent  their business models  and update  their product  offerings.  For
this to happen,  a vital cog in the wheel,  so to say, is having  a set of skilled
employees  and a motivated  workforce.  The pace  of change  we encounter  3 nowadays  is swift,  and by all indications  this pace will only increase,  riding  on the
crest  of the digital  transformation playing out in the financial  services industry.
Therefore,  it is imperative that the financial  institutions  and their employees have
the capacity to not only deliver  on the expected  service  levels continuously,  but
also have the capacity to adapt  to both foreseen  and unforeseen challenges.  In
current  times,  building the capacity  of employees  and continuous upgradati on of
their skills  is not an option  but a necessity.
In any service  industry,  amongst  the four factors of production,  human
capital  is the most  significant  which  fundamentally  determines the growth  trajectory
of the institutions  and organisations.  Human  capital  is not just important  in the
areas of the organi sational  structures  and functioning but is also critical in foster ing
innovation  and increasing productivity  which  contributes  substantially towards  both
individual  and institution al growth. This is true in the case  of banking industry as
well.
The agility  demonstrated  by banks  and financial  services firms  during  the
pandemic is a testament  to their investment  in human resources and technology.
As their focus shifted  towards  digital  mode  of interface,  they scaled  up remote
engagements and quickly reshaped  overall  working models.  Employees were
dynamically redeployed amongst  verticals based  on evolving business needs.  This
experiment  served the institutions  well in various  aspects  – in optimal  utilisation  of
human  resources,  in timely  on-boarding new customers  and in ensuring business
continuity.  In my view,  this exploratory experience would have  given many  of the 4 banks a sense of comfort  and confidenc e in agility -driven  dynamic  allocation  of a
future  oriented workforce.
Here,  let me emphasize  that when  I say skilled  workforce,  I do not mean  the
to say that the focus  should be on the functional  and technical  knowledge of the
employees  alone.  Soft skills are equally, or dare I say, more  important in a service
industry  like banking.  An effective customer  engagement  together  with an
empathetic approach acts as a major  differentiator  in a highly competitive market.
Also, unlike technical  skills  which frequently  get obsolete with changing  business
environment,  soft skills  fetch  perpetual  returns  as they stay with the individual  over
his lifetime .
Now,  let me now focus a bit more  on one of the essential  facets  of soft skills
required for an effective  customer  engagement  – namely ‘communication ’. The
ability  to communicate  effectively, has, of late, become  very important  for the entire
banking community.  In my view,  there are two reasons for this change,  first –
thanks to the sustained efforts  of all the regulators  and the Government,  the
customer  awareness  on financial matters  has improved a lot. Members  of public,
with enhanced awareness , are demanding  better  services,  which is a welcome
move.  Many  customers, however,  may still not be fully aware about  the finer
nuances of the financial  offerings. Hence,  determining suitability  and
appropriateness of a customer  for a financial  product  and service  becomes
necessary  for the financial  service  providers. Effective  and clear  communication  5 on the risks and rewards  of any product,  thus becomes  a vital pre-requisite  while
on-boarding a new customer  or cross -selling  a product  to an existing customer.
Second,  as the income  levels  improve,  customers’  demand  for bespoke
products and services is expected to increase . In tandem  with this, from the supply
side,  enhanced bouquet  of products and services offered  by financial  entities
makes  the market  significantly  dynamic,  something  which was difficult to imagine
a decade  back.  More  so, technology -led delivery mode  has expanded the reach  of
traditional financial  institutions  to hitherto  unexplored geographies  and segments.
Two decades  ago, one could  not have imagined  transferring  money  from one
account  to another  without  visiting  a bank  branch.  Fast forward  to the present  and,
you don’t  even need  to visit the branch  as most  of your banking needs  can be met
digitally.
Even  as technology  aids the financial  institutions  to expand their reach and
enable round  the clock  access  to financial  services to the customers at their
convenience,  there are also challenges to be handled. These  come  in the form of
high obsolescence rate, which  means that financial institutions  have no option  but
to continue  investing  in technology.  However,  one resource which  no other
competitor  can replicate  easily,  is the human  capital  of an organisation.  Therefore,
how the banks train their workforce in both aspects – business  as well as
behaviour,  would  decide  who will have  the competitive  edge going forwa rd and
here communication  will be an important  dimension of the behavioural  training .  6 Communication in business  setting  has two important  aspect s – individual
and institutional. Individual  communication pertains to the front-line staff – how
they communicate with the customer  while  institutional communication  means  how
the policies and priorities  are communicated  by the institution  to its external  as well
as internal  stakeholders.  Effective  communication  by individual  employees  can win
customers , and the appropriate corporate communication by the institution  can
enhance its public  image  and brand value.  Therefore,  it is imperative  that the top
echelon of the entity  focuses  on both – by undertaking appropriate  training  and
sensitisation of front-line staff and by putting  in place an appropriate enterprise -
wide communication  strategy  which conforms  to its core values and ideology.
The importance of communication  pervades  the financial system,  including
the central  banks.  Communication has gained  greater  importance for central  banks
following  the global  financial  crisis  (GFC),  when evolving  mandates  and new tools
required more  explanation to both experts  as well as non-expert  audiences.
Unconventional  policies adopted by central  banks  have also been the subject  of
public  debate.  As a result, central  banks,  over the last two decades,  have  been
trying  to demystify their mandates and working to put across their views  in a simple
manner  to anchor  stakeholder  expectations.  The necessity  of this manifested  with
greater  urgency during  the covid  pandemic.
Let me also add that central  banks  are unique  institutions  inasmuch  as they
probably touch lives of almost  everyone in the country.  They  also have  a range  of
mandates – monetary policy, regulation and supervision of financial  system,  7 consumer  protection and ensuring financial stability , among  others. Effective
delivery  of these m andates in today’s dynamic  world  requires  that they are able to
communicate their policies , regulations,  and the rationale  of their actions clearly  in
a manner  which could  reach  a wider  spectrum  of audience.  Doing  so effectively
requires a transparent  and consistent  communication approach,  leveraging on the
available medium s, tools,  and technology to communicate  the right material in the
right manner  to the audience,  both external  and internal.
Effective  communication  is like a good  recipe.  You have  to get all ingredients
in the right proportion  to make  it palatable.  Most  of the times, communication for a
central  bank - and you all will agree with me on this – is bit of a tight rope walk in
the face of strong  cross  winds.  Central banks  must  always  be careful in their
communication to avoid any inconsistency between what  they say and what  is
understood and interpreted  by the markets and stakeholders.  Everyone  tries to
dissect  and parse  each  and every word,  probably looking  at the synonyms and
semantics  in search of the meaning  which was not conveyed  or intended  in what
they speak . Any difference  in perception  between the two could have  unintended
consequences or dilute  the impact  of policy actions.
We have come a long way since the days  when  Central Banks  were
shrouded in mystery.  Central B ank communication has evolved to become  more
transparent  over the decades.  In my opinion,  two things  have  brought  about  this
change.  First, as the remit  and mandates of modern  central  banks  has expanded
in last half century or so, they have  become  increasingly accountable for their 8 actions.  Now,  in most  countries  of the world, central  banks  must  demonstrate that
they are acting  within  the statutory  mandate  and how are they delivering  on that
mandate.  Second,  central  banks  have  realised  that the policy  making  can be more
effective if the changes  are predictable.  Now,  there  is credible amount  of literature
which points out that successful  ‘expectations management’  by the central banks
through effective  and credible  communication can increase the effectiveness of
policy  measures .
In India,  we have  another  dimension to central  bank communication.  This
dimension  relates  to Reserve Bank’s regulatory  and developmental  role. The
Reserve Bank  is not only responsible for monetary policy  but also for an array  of
functions including  regulation,  supervision,  currency management,  payment
systems,  management  of external  sector  and the government  debt.  Therefore,  the
communication m ix of RBI must  address a large  number  of issues ranging  from
financial  literacy  to financial  stability.  To achieve  this, a considerable amount  of
work  has been done  in recent  past in expanding  the reach  of Reserve  Bank’ s
communication.
Earlier, most  of the people  knew  about  the Reserve Bank  only as an issuer
of the currency.  However,  in past one and half decades,  we have  undertaken
concerted efforts  to demystify  the mandates  and functioning  of the Reserve Bank
through series  of financial  literacy  and awareness  campaigns . We are also
undertaking several  customer  education initiatives  under  ‘RBI Kehta Hai’ slogan
which I am sure many  of you would have  seen . At the same time RBI 9 communication on monetary policy,  prudential  policy  and financial stability  has also
undergone significant changes.  It has become  clearer, continuous  and mostly
calendar  based. You might  recall the regular  press  conferences by the Governor
during  the COVID lockdown  where  he telegraphed the policy  steps  being taken by
the Reserve Bank  to mitigate  the impact  of COVID  on the economy,  industry,  and
members  of the public.  Communication with all stakeholders including members
of public  is an important  strategic tool in furthering  public  policy  objectives  and
mandates  for the Reserve Bank.  Public understanding can help ease  the way for
reforms,  as well as increase support  for policies.
Today’s fast-paced world  requires  us to continually engag e in a process of
learning, unlearning,  and relearning.  The ever-changing modes  of communication
are also keeping us on our toes,  so much so that often  it seems  that we are chasing
a moving  target.  With the advent  of social  media,  the communication is
instantaneously consumed,  assimilated,  and commented,  all within  few seconds
and in few hundred words . As far as central  banks are conce rned,  there  is no one-
size-fits-all solution  for communication.  For serious  policy issues and monetary
policy,  it is important  that the context,  rationale  and setting  of decision making  is
placed  before the audience to enable  them  to appreciate the outcome. For public
awareness  on topical issues,  we have  a 360-degree media  approach to reach  out
to as many  people as possible  in the language  they understand.
However,  at a broader  level,  it must  be appreciated that effective  and
transparent  communication is the key for achieving the mandate  set forth at the 10 individual  institutions  level, be it is Central  Bank  or a financial entity. This is
particularly  challenging for us in India  as we are dealing  with a large  populace  in a
multilingual and multicultural  environment.  Communication  is a vehicle  for the
financial  services industry  for raising  awareness,  shaping expectations,  promoting
financial  education,  and financial  inclusion. However,  the expanding  sphere of
entities  and people  who consume  our communications presents both – a challenge
and opportunity.  Opportunity  as it helps in achieving our mandates effectively.
Challenge  as reaching out to this diverse set of end-users  with differing  level of
financial  awareness  puts our methods  to test. Communication is a very powerful
tool to set the right expectations during  turbulent times  and in tempering
expectations right during  the periods  of exuberance.
Acquiring  appropriate soft skills, including good  communication skills,  is thus
important  for an organisation to succeed . Additionally, it is important  for us as
individuals  to excel  at a personal  level and as responsible members  of society and
institutions.  It is for this reason that business  communication is an important  facet
of management  education. It is, in my view,  an extremely  vital skill you need to
consciously develop  to chart  your individual  growth  paths. Business
communication was and I believe still is, a part of the course curriculum  for
management  programmes developed here at the School  of Management  Studies.
Given  my experience with the utility  of communication  in all facets  of life, I should
in conc lusion  pay homage  to the role of pioneers like Dr Pylee whose  vision for
establishing a business school  in Kochi  enable d several  of us to partake  of these  11 critical skills  which  have enriched our lives and hopefully the effectiveness of
organisations that we serve.
Thank  you for your attention.
Namaskaar!!