1
Fundamental Shifts in the Global Economy :
New Complexities, Challenges and Policy Options
Keynote Address by Shri Shaktikanta Das, Governor
Reserve Bank of India
Delivered at the 59th SEACEN Governors' Conference in
Mumbai ; February 15, 2024
On behalf  of the Reserve Bank of India, the current Chair of the
SEACEN (South East Asian Central Banks) forum, I extend a warm
welcome to Governors of central  banks and other delegates to this
59th SEACEN Governors’ Conference. The weather in Mumbai
during this time of the year is pleasant and I hope you get some time
for sightseeing. As everyone in this hall is aware, SEACEN  plays a
pivotal role in promoting collaboration, knowledge sharing and policy
coordination among the member central banks, and thereby
contributes significantly to the stability, resilience and sustainable
development of the regional and the global economy.
2. We are gathered here at a critical juncture when the
international economic landscape is undergoing profound
transformations. The prospects of a soft landing have improved for
the global economy, but there are multiple  challenges with
uncertainties looming on the horizon. The theme of the Conference
“Navigating Economic Headwinds and Advancing Financial
Inclusion: Perspectives and Challenges” aptly fits into the current
policy dilemma that all central banks of the region face today.  In
these times, prudent macro -financial policies assume even greater 2
importance for all of us to not only navigate through the current
turbulence, but also to chart a course towards a more promising
future. It is heartening to note that  the economies in the region are
making notable progress and are positioning themselves for
continued advancement in the years ahead.  There is a need for
deeper integration in this region to stimulate economic growth and
foster inclusiveness. I am sure the insightful discussions at this
conference will offer some takeaways for our future policy making.
3. I have chosen the theme  “Fundamental Shifts in the Global
Economy: New Complexities, Challenges and Policy Options” for my
address today. First, I propose to speak about  the resilience of the
global economy in recent years in marked contrast to  the earlier
periods of cris is. Thereafter, I propose to  outline the emerging trends
and shifts  that are currently reshaping the global economy
irreversibly and posing significant challenges for policymakers.
Finally, my effort would be to provide a macroeconomic overview of
our region, followed by highlighting some policy choices for the
future .
Resilience of the Global Economy
4. According to the latest projection of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the g lobal growth is projected at 3.1 percent in 2024 and
3.2 percent in 2025, with forecast for 2024 revised upward by 0.2
percentage point from its  October 2023 projection. It is interesting to
note that  that this time around the global economy has been far more 3
resilient, weathering repeated shocks remarkably well. Even the
financial system has broadly withstood the unprecedented monetary
tightening across the world. The resilience of emerging market
economies (EMEs), in particular,  stands out unlike previous episodes
of volatility which saw  EMEs at the receiving end. EMEs have
probably learnt from their past experience and played it well this time.
While there is no definitive answer to this so called soft landing as
yet, let me outline some possible factors.
5. First, during the global financial crisis (GFC) and the previous
episodes of global turmoil, banking crises were a common feature in
which insufficiently capitalised banks were at the core of the crisis. In
contrast, this time the EMEs did not face adverse spillover effects
from the recent banking sector turmoi l in the advanced economies
(AEs) in March 2023. This has been possible due to the
strengthening of prudential regulation through wider adoption of
Basel III norms and improvements in supervisory practices, which
has resulted in a much- improved banking and financial system.
Second, the improved macroeconomic fundamentals and buffers of
the EMEs in recent years provided cushion against global shocks of
the last four years. Third , fiscal and monetary stimulus provided
during the COVID- 19 has not been fully rolled back, especially in
AEs. This has so far somewhat restricted the degree of  spillovers
from policy tightening by the AEs.  Fourth, greater diffusion of
technology in industry and services has gained traction after the
pandemic. This has enhanced productivity in several EMEs and
offset the adverse impact on output from factors like monetary 4
tightening. In fact, technology has opened up new vistas of
opportunities for EMEs, particularly in the services sector.  Fifth, due
credit also has to be given to calibrated and clear communication by
central banks. Effective communication has now become an even
stronger tool than earlier in providing forward guidance and
anchoring market expectations.
Changing Landscape of the Global Economy
6. The pandemic was an unprecedented crisis of epic proportions
in terms of loss of life and livelihood. In recent human history,
recessions have been caused by swings in agricultural production,
sharp jump in oil prices and financial upheavals. The global financial
crisis also was a manifestation of the financial excesses growing
under the benign neglect  of policymakers. In contrast, the pandemic
was a health emergency leading to  a complete shutdown of
economic activity and mobility to save lives against an unknown
enemy. Consequently, there was no clear or  readymade template for
policymakers to follow; instead, they had to innovate and learn on the
job in framing appropriate policy responses to minimise the negative
impact of the pandemic on the economy and the financial system.
7. When the shadows of the pandemic were receding, geopolitical
tensions and supply chain disruptions fuelled new challenges and
inflation came back strongly.  The resultant regime shift in monetary
policy rattled financial market sentiments leading to a period of ‘great
volatility ’. Existing models that were built to explain historical patterns 5
in the data were found wanting in explaining the new realities. These
models are now being increasingly challenged by ongoing shocks,
geo-economic tensions and supply chain reconfigurations. For
instance, models focusing on aggregate analysis fell short to explain
what we observed in the aftermath of the pandemic. There was a
rotation in demand initially from services to goods and then from goods to services. There was also a period of pent -up and revenge
spending. These sectoral imbalances kept the levels of inflation high.
The pandemic has indeed highlighted the need for more granular  and
sectoral analysis. In a sense, paradigm shifts in economic thinking
are on the anvil. Let me  reflect on some of these i ssues further .
8. First, the world after the pandemic has changed fundamentally
in terms of shifting labour market dynamics, work processes and
technological deepening. Work from home, online education and
shopping have received wide acceptance, altering the way we work,
learn and live.  Technological innovation and digitalisation are
permeating through every sector of the economy. Businesses are
adapting to these trends for their survival .  Frontier technologies like
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are being used
widely  to boost productivity.  These technologies open new
opportunities, but they also present challenges that we need to
address.
9. Second, monetary policy before the pandemic was operating in
a low for long regime in its quest  for reviving growth while resisting
deflationary pressures. This situation changed suddenly and 6
drastically with monetary policy adopting the stance of “ higher for
longer ” rates to fight inflationary pressures, following the war in
Ukraine. Such regime shifts in the presence of debt overhang in an
environment of high interest rates and low  growth raise concerns on
macroeconomic stability in many countries. Higher interest rates not
only raise the interest servicing burden of heavily indebted countries
but also impact the balance sheet of banks and financial institutions,
as it was seen during the recent banking sector turmoil in advanced
economies. In an extreme sense, high indebtedness of countries
may constrain monetary policy due to sharp trade- off between price
stability and financial stability.
10. Third , globalisation had boosted the global economy by
enhancing productivity, creating global value chains and free
movement of capital and labour across countries. The benefits of
globalisation, however, had reached unevenly across countries. Given the recent trends of geo- economic fragmentation, industrial
and trade policies worldwide are undergoing a shift . Several
economies are now reshoring, nearshoring and friend-shoring
1 their
production processes on security and strategic considerations. Consequently, there is growing trade fragmentation, technological
decoupling, disrupted capital flows  and labour movements. All of
these do not portend well for an integrated global market for  goods
and services.
1 The term “reshoring” refers to a country’s transfer of (part of the) global supply chain
back home (or geographically closer to home the case of “nearshoring”). “Friend -
shoring” limits supply -chain networks and the sourcing of inputs to countries allied wi th
the home country and trusted partners with aligned strategic and political preferences . 7
11. Fourth, from emerging market economies (EMEs) perspective,
disruptions in trade flows in food, energy and critical industrial inputs
due to recurring geopolitical flashpoints and disturbances in key trade
routes are raising concerns for food security and macroeconomic
management . Moreover, in view of the volatility in financial markets
and capital flows, these countries remain vulnerable to external
shocks. In such an environment, creation of domestic buffers in terms
of stra tegic reserves of critical commodities as well as a strong
umbrella of forex reserves become imperative for the EMEs .
12. Fifth, macroeconomic models used by central banks  so far have
mainly focused on the demand side of the economy. Enough
emphasis was not given on supply side  factors. The pandemic ,
followed by the war , and the resultant supply chain disruptions have
brought in a sharp focus on the supply side. Overlapping supply
shocks, as we saw recently, led to persistent inflationary pressures even when aggregate demand was not unreasonably high. In this
context, the role of  government s in managing the supply- side or
cost- push pressures on inflation has increasingly gained wider
acceptance. Going forward, a better understanding of the supply side
of the economy has become very important for conducting monetary
policy more effectively.
13. Against this background, let me now briefly touch upon the
macroeconomic settings in our region.
8
Macroeconomic Overview of the SEACEN Region
14. The South- East Asian economies have shown remarkable
resilience in the face of large global shocks. To a large extent, this
can be attributed to improved monetary and macroeconomic policy framework that these countries have adopted in recent years. Growth in this region has remained strong, while inflation has been lower than the OECD average. E conomic activity of the region has been
supported by resilient services activity across sectors such as retail trade, digital services, e -commerce and tourism. Th is region remain s
a model of regional integration with close trade and labour flow linkages. Nevertheless, there is  significant untapped potential for
further trade integration. I strongly feel that p romotion of tourism
within the SE ACEN countries can further strengthen the economies
of the region.
15. Turning to the Indian economy, India has successfully
navigated through multiple challenges and emerged as the fastest growing large economy.  Prudent monetary and fiscal policies have
paved the path for India’s success in sailing through these rough
waters. The Reserve Bank projects the Indian economy to grow by
7.0 per cent during 2024- 25, marking the fourth successive year of
growth at or above 7 per cent.  Inflation has moderated from the highs
of the summer of 2022. Recurring food price shocks and renewed
flash points on the geo- political front, however, pose challenges to
the ongoing disinflation process. We remain vigilant to navigate
through the last mile of disinflation as it is often the most difficult part 9
of the journey. We firmly recognise that stable and low inflation will
provide the necessary bedrock for sustainable economic growth.
16. India’s coordinated policy response in the face of a series of
adverse shocks  can be a good template for the future .  While
monetary policy worked on anchoring inflation expectations and quelling demand- pull pressures, supply side interventions by the
government alleviated supply- side pressures and moderated cost -
push inflation. E ffective fiscal -monetary coordination was at the core
of India’s success.
17. I would now like to turn to some possible policy choices for  the
future course of the global economy, as new realities take shape in
the years to come.
Policy Choices Going Ahead
18. First, we need to chalk out an effective strategy for global
cooperation and coordination to deal with multiple challenges afflicting the global economy. Multilateralism must be re -energised.
In this regard, agreements on a “critical minerals corridor” and a “food
corridor” for safeguarding food security are necessary.  Such
arrangements have to be fair and equitable.
19. Second, there is a need to develop cooperation in areas of
common interest and urgent needs such as climate change where no country can devise strategies on its own.  Smooth and orderly green
transition is necessary to avoid disruptions to economic activity and
loss of growth potential. While the investment needs for smooth 10
green transition are large, the actual financial flows to green projects
are highly skewed and are, by and large, concentrated in advanced
economies. As a result, there is a need to enhance green capital
flows to EMEs . At the same time, we have to be mindful of potential
financial stability implications of green transition.
20. Third , improving infrastructure remains key to long- term growth.
While investment in hard infrastructure (roads, ports, airports, electricity, water) is important, there has to be equal emphasis on creating soft infrastructure (education, health, legal, financial, institutional). Skill enhancement and increasing female labour force participation are key to enhancing effective labour supply and
potential growth of the region.
21. Fourth, India’s experience has shown how Digital Public
Infrastructure  (DPI) can be utilised for advancing financial inclusion
and productivity gains through cost reductions. Our sustained engagement in the India Stack and the Unified Payments Interface
(UPI), especially during the pandemic and thereafter, has given us the confidence that digital public infrastructure can become a critical
part of global public good when scaled up beyond national
boundaries. The linkage of Indian UPI and the fast payment systems
of a few other countries drives home the potential  of the UPI to
become an international model for cross- border payments.
22. Fifth, new technological developments like artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning (ML) can bring about significant 11
improvements in efficiency and productivity of businesses.
Necessary safeguards, however,  need to be put in place to prevent
the misuse of technology. In particular, global financial market
regulators need to be vi gilant about the possible misuse of AI and ML
in perpetrating financial fraudulence.
Conclusion
23. The global economy stands at crossroads. Challenges remain
in plenty, but new opportunities are also knocking at the door.
Together, the course we take from here will decide our destiny in times to come. We need policies that are attuned to the new realities
of the global economy. In an uncertain world, central banks need to
be proactive to better serve the objectives of price and financial
stability.
24. In this environment , collaboration is not an option but a
necessity. We need greater resolve and coordination to make significant progress in dealing with global challenges. SEACEN, as a platform for central banks of the region, serves as a valuable forum
for sharing insights and fostering cooperation in several areas for
enhanced progress and prosperity. The cooperation among
countries should give due consideration to the principles of comparative advantage and resource endowments so that each one of us benefit s. Let us take our deliberations to the next level to
achieve well-being of our people and our economies.
Thank You, Namaskar.