1 Edited Transcript of the Reserve Bank of India’s Post -Monetary
Policy  Press Conference : February 8, 2024
Participants from the RBI:
Shri Shaktikanta Das – Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Dr. Michael D. Patra – Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Shri M. Rajeshwar Rao – Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Shri T. Rabi Sankar – Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Shri Swaminathan J. – Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Dr. O. P. Mall – Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India
Dr. Rajiv Ranjan – Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India
Moderator:
Shri Yogesh Dayal – Chief General Manager, Reserve Bank of India
Yogesh Dayal:
Good afternoon everyone and welcome to th e Post-policy Press Conference. Today ,
we have Shri Shakti kanta Das, Governor, Reserve Bank of India with us , along with
Dr. Michael Patra, S hri M. Rajeshwar Rao, S hri T. Rabi Sankar and Shri Swaminathan
J. We also have with us today Executive Directors, Dr. O. P. Mall and Dr. Raj iv Ranjan
and my colleague s from  the RBI .
Sir, we have 2 1 media persons present here and we will first go with your opening
remarks and then we will go for the press conference.  Over to you  Sir.
Shaktikanta Das:
Thank you for being here. Good morning. You already have heard the statement. It
has been uploaded to the RBI website . As a part of my initial remarks, I would like to
make nine points :
i) Domestic economic activity continues to be strong . We expect the real GDP to
grow by 7% in the next financial year 2024-25.
ii)  CPI inflation is moderating with intermittent interruptions and spikes. We have to
remain vigilant about the incoming data and the outlook. Our endeavo ur to achieve
4% inflation on a durable ba sis has to continue.
iii)  Globally , markets are front -running central banks in anticipation of policy pivots .
But central banks remain apprehensive and await a more durable alignment of
inflation with targets.
iv)  Liquidity will be actively managed by the Reserve  Bank.
v)  Our multi -pronged proactive and calibrated policies have worked well to maintain
and strengthen macroeconomic and financial stability.
vi)  Systemic , sectoral and institution -specific signs of stress are being proactively
monitored and acted upon where ver necessary.
2 vii)  Let me reiterate that good governance, robust risk management, sound
compliance culture and protection of customers interest s are the hallmarks of the
Reserve Bank's approach to the safety and stability of the financial system and
individual financial institutions. Regulated entities must accord the highest priority
to these aspects.
viii)  The external sector of the economy remains resilient. The current account deficit
is expected to be eminently manageable.
ix) The exchange rate of the Ind ian rupee has remained stable. Thank you.
Yogesh Dayal:
Thank you Sir, for those opening remarks. So, I will begin by inviting Lat ha Venkatesh
from CNBC TV18.
Latha Venkatesh , CNBC TV18:
I have  a little confusion about whether you are distinguishing between  liquidity and
your stance. You have mentioned in three places that the entire rate hike has not been
fully transmitted . So, I assume you want more hike s to be transmitted . But separately
in para 21, you have said that you will manage liquidity with a bunch of instruments.
Should we , therefore,  understand that , unlike the majority of the last five months when
the call was closer to 6.75 %, you were in the last one week where you will give lo ng-
term liquidity through the repo and adjust for short -term, which is to keep the call rate
closer to 6.5 %. Is that what you are trying to say that I will do that, but I want more
interest rate hikes to happen ? Sir, since you have dwel led twice on this good
governance, are you trying to say that you will not give Paytm any further timeline to
set them right? Does Feb 29 stand? Is that what we should understand?
Shaktikanta Das:
I would request Deputy Governor Michael Patra to reply  to the first part of the question
and for the second part , I would request Deputy Governor Swaminathan to  reply.
Michael D. Patra:
As the Governor has clarified in his statement, the stance is all about the future course
of policy rates. Now, liquidity is endogen ous to the rate . When the rate is the chief
instrument of Monetary Pol icy, liquidity follows the rate. You have to move liquid ity to
achieve a certain rate. Our objective is to keep the weighted average call rate around
the repo  rate. But there are times when there are temporary drivers of autonomous
liquidity, like Government balances, which go through tectonic shifts and market
participants take time to adjust even if they are unsure of the future direction of this.
So, that is why sometimes the call rate goes to where it went, but you saw that we
were nimble in our actions,  and we brought it down to the repo rate.  That is our
endeavo ur.
3 Latha Venkatesh , CNBC TV18 :
After five months, will you be like the previous  five months ?
Michael  D. Patra:
No, th at is not correct . Because at the time when the rates were up, we allowed market
participants to take what liquidity they wanted from us through our standing facilities ,
and we did the main operation every 14th day. So, it was not that we let it go, you saw
the reaction to the V RRR. They  were unwilling to let go  because they were unsure
about how balances w ould move.
Swaminathan  J.:
As a matter of policy, we do  not comment on individual entit ies or actions that we
initiate in such cases. Since this question is on the uppermost in mind of most of you,
I would like to say two, or three  things essentially to set the context. While we do  not
want to be discussing individual details here, because that w ould not be p roper . In
terms of context, as you all know this is a supervisory action against a regulated entity
for persistent non -compliance . Second , such supervisory actions are invariably
preceded by months and at times years of bilateral engagement where we not only
point o ut the deficiencies but also provide more than adequate time for them to take
corrective action. Third,  of course , as a regulator , it is incumbent upon us to protect
the interest of the ultimate consumer and thereby protecting the stability of the financia l
system. So , these actions have to be seen in that particular context .
Coming to the second part of your question, what lies ahead? As part of MPC, we do
not give a forecast in these matters. So, you will have to wait , and of course , the
feedback we have  been getting , we will work on , and as a responsible regulator ,
suitable steps will be taken to ensure that customer inconvenience , if any , is
minimi sed. So , we will take care . With that , we can give a rest to this question and
then move on to the MPC .
Yogesh Dayal:
Thank you, Sirs. I will move on to Mr. Go vardhan Rangan from The Economic Times .
Govardhan Rangan , The Economic Times:
For the rates status quo, you specifically mentioned that the transmission of 250 basis
points is still continuing. So, the banker s say that the deposit rates have already gone
up by 200-250 basis points and the lending rates have also gone up. So, what in your
mind is the actual transmission that has not happened and how much is that and what
is the benchmark that you  are looking at to conclude that the transmission has
happened ?
Shaktikanta Das:
I would request D G Swaminathan to reply to that question .
4 Swaminathan J .:
As far as  the transmission is in a hiking p hase as we have always seen in the past ,
the rates on the deposit side reset much faster and they get passed on , and as we
have seen, deposit rates have almost played out . While on the lending side , it does
take time to pass for two major reasons in our assessment. One is that the proportion
of loans that are benchmarked  externally, what we call EB LR-linked loans is still less
than 50% . Where the transmission could be instant is only where the EBLR comes
into play. In the case of other instruments , other benchmarks like MCLR , base rates
or fixed rate loans, it does take time to transmit . That is the precise reason , why we
still see that transmission is fully not in place. Secondly, in the hiking phase , we have
seen banks anxiety to maintain their market share in the incrementa l credit, also adjust
their margins so as not to lose their market share in the incremental credit  and that
also impedes the complete transmission in terms of the effective interest rate.
Yogesh Dayal:
I will move on to Mr. Ankur Mishra from ET NOW .
Ankur Mishra , ET NOW :
We understand t hat t here ha ve been meeting s with the Paytm officials and the
Reserve  Bank . And what transpired in that , I do not want to know the exact details, but
from the financial system point of view, the company has been claiming that they have
taken all the remedial measures and all the efforts are being made so that there is
minimal or no impact on customers . From that point  of view, i s there any remedial
measure which has been suggested by the Reserve Bank?
Swaminathan J .:
This is again a matter of bilateral discussion . So, I do not think that it will be proper for
us to discuss it in this forum. So, discussing  individual entities and giving granular
details in this matter  will not be very proper . So, we are sei zed of the issue and as we
take steps, we will keep the media and public certainly informed.
Shaktikanta Das:
As the Deputy Gove rnor has already commente d and I am again saying in a general
sense, not specific to this case ; we give sufficient time to every regulated entity, that
is supervised by the Reserve Bank, to comply with the regulatory requirements. We
give sufficient time and as DG pointed out, sometimes it may even look like more than
sufficient  time. We are a responsible regulator , we are a responsible supervisor. If
everything had been complied  with, I am talking about in a general sense, why should
we act? After all, we have a re sponsibility  and the RBI is a responsible institution . That
is how it is.
Yogesh Dayal:
Now I will invite Jeevan Bha wasar from All India Radio .
5 Jeevan Bhawasar, All India Radio :
Over the last few months , some of the banks have reduced their lending rates but the
benefit of a reduced rate is being given to the new customers and the old customers
are still paying higher lending rates as per the old rates. So, to bring parity , will the RBI
issue some instructions or will talk to the banks?
M. Rajeshwar Rao :
The revised interest rate which the new customers get but the existing customers also
benefit from that . When it resets then the existing customers get the benefit of this . So
there is no need for the policy change because based on  the guidelines of the floating
interest rate both existing customers and new customers will be benefitted from this.
Yogesh Dayal:
Thank you sir, I will invite now Anand Adhikari, Business Today.
Anand Adhikari , Business Today :
I will also make an attempt on P aytm.  DG Swaminathan talked about this persistent
non-compliance and he also said in such cases months and years of bilateral
engagement. My question is why did the RBI not consider appointing  a director on the
Board of Paytm when you knew about this persistent non -compliance issue?
Swaminathan  J.:
As a regulator , we have various tools in the kitty and it  is not necessary that every
single tool be deployed in every single situation . That we make our own assessment
to the scale and proportiona te of the issue, as well as the tool that we will have to use
at different points in time. So , a one-size-fits-all kind of solution may not work in such
situations . So, I would like to stop there rather t han trying to elaborate on that. We may
use certain tools or may not use certain tools, but it is after due consideration that we
do. Thank you.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir. I will move on to Mr. Anup Roy from Bloomberg.
Anup Roy, Bloomberg :
Sir, the budget was non -inflationary, and the Government really brought down the
fiscal deficit, et c. The bond yields have fallen  so the Government probably wants
interest rates to come down. But the RBI probably is keeping interest rates high . You
are saying the transmission is not completed et c. So, is there a lack of coordination?
Shaktikanta Das:
No. Has the Government said anywhere that they want the interest rates to be brought
down. It is a very speculative proposition . So, I cannot reply to that question.
Yogesh Dayal:
Thank you Sir. I will invite  Shyama Mishra from Doordarshan.
6 Shyama Mishra , Doordarshan :
Sir, it is again on Paytm. The situation as we describe it is that Paytm is known as one
of the pioneers of fintech . Coming to this situation, do you see this as a worrisome
situation for the entire sector ? What lesson would you like to highlight for any similar
future companies?
Shaktikanta  Das:
Let me provide some broad guidance on this Paytm issue. There have been at least
four or five questions till now and there  could be many more questions. So, let me put
the record straight.
You said that you worry about the system and all that . There is no worry about the
system at the moment. Here we are talking about a specific institution, a specific
payment bank. As Deputy Governor Swaminathan has already explained . He has
provided several details. Similarly, I also do  not want to comment on a  specific case.
But in this context, I would like to make some general observations, not with specific
reference to Paytm as such, but some general observations, which include all our
regulated entities. So, all our regulated entities do not exclude Paytm,  it is applicable
to all regulated entities. I would like to make about six or seven points.
i) Over the last few years, as all of you are aware, we have significantly deepened
our supervisory systems approach and methods.
ii) As the Deputy Governor has pointed  out, our emphasis is always on bilateral
engagement with the regulated entity  and in t hat engagement, we are completely
focused on nudging the regulated entity to take corrective action. Let me rephrase
it for you to make note . Our emphasis is always on bilateral engagement with the
regulated entities with a focus on nudging them for corrective action and sufficient
time is given for undertaking such corrective action.
iii) When such constructive engagement, which we undertake , does n ot work or when
the regulated entity does not take effective action, we go for imposing supervisory
or business restrictions.
iv) Such restrictions which we impose are always proportionate to the gravity of the
situation. Please take note that such restrictio ns are proportionate to the gravity of
the situation.
v) Being a responsible regulator, being a responsible supervisor, all our actions are
in the best interest of systemic stability and protection of depositors ' and
customers ' interest s. These aspects cannot  be compromised. Individual entities
should be mindful of these aspects for their long -term success.
vi) Over the last few days, we have received a lot of queries and clarifications from
various quarters including members of the public . You have raised a few questions
7 today. So, we have noted all these questions and clarifications which have been
sought from us and based on that, we will be issuing a FAQ sometime next week.
So, that should address all these questions and clarifications whi ch are being
raised by you, and which have been raised in the public domain and raised
bilaterally with us from various quarters.
vii) Finally, let me stress and let me emphatically state that the Reserve Bank is and
will continue to encourage and support inno vation and technology in the financial
sector. Let there not be any doubt about the Reserve Bank ’s commitment to
promote fintech , to promote innovation, and to promote technology in the financial
system. Thank you.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir. I will move on to Mr.  Dinesh  Unnikrishnan from Moneycontrol.
Dinesh Unnikrishnan , Moneycontrol :
I have a very short, related question. In your remarks, you stressed about good
governance and sound compliance, and this is not something that you are speaking
about for the first time. You have been emphasi sing this part and the role of the Boards
in regulatory entities is extremely critical, as you have pointed out. What is your view
on the role of the Paytm Board, because it did  not happen all of a sudden ? Since 202 1,
the RBI has been alerting to the regulatory breaches and as for the process, the RBI
onsite inspection report is passed on to the ACB and the Board for corrective actions.
So probably , if they had acted on time , things would not have worsened to this level.
So, why is the regulator silent on the role of the Board, while the reasons for this action
are quite evident?
Shaktikanta  Das:
Typically , we do not share such granular information. We have been engaged with the
institution , with the entity , for quite some time. Within that , with whom we interacted
and how it was , such granular details , it will not be appropriate on our part to share .
Yoges h Dayal :
Thank you Sir. I will move on to Mr.  Vishwanath Nair from NDTV Profit.
Vishwanath  Nair, NDTV  Profit :
I will give you a little respite and move on to another topic. On CBDCs , you are talking
about introducing additional programs.
Shaktikanta  Das:
No, we do  not need any respite. Go ahead . But the point is same question s are  coming
up, and also as much as we are issuing a FAQ. So, I would request if you have still
some clarifications  or something on which you want clarity, you can send it bilaterally
to us, directly you can mail it to us, and we will see to what extent we can address  that
question.
8 Vishwanath  Nair, NDTV  Profit :
Sure. My question is with regard to the additional programmability that you are
proposing to bring in with respect to the CBDC pilot. The question has been there
since the beginning when DG Rabi Shankar introduced  this topic . Does not this go
against the fungibility of money, if the intent is to make CBDC equivalent  paper
currency and if you introduce specific restrictions on usage, does the fungibility factor
not go opposite to that?
Shaktikanta Das:
No, we are not imposing a restriction. We are making it more flexible . But let DG Rabi
Sankar take that question.
T. Rabi Sankar :
Thank you for shifting to me. I will give a more formal answer, but the best way to think
about it is that when a family puts some currency notes in a package to be used for
let’s say groceries during the month, does  not mean that the fungibility  of the currency
is lost, it  is just that until that spending happens. It can be used for no other purpose.
I am just giving you an example, to be able to think about  what we mean by fungibility.
What we mean by programmability, is when you do programmability for a moment
fungibility is on hold, we have to reali se that it  is a facility that we are providing the
currency. Again, by way of an example, let ’s suppose that a school has given some
money to a student who won a prize to bu y books in a particular shop. So, the student
can only use this money to buy books in that shop that  are intended. Supposing the
student goes and buys that book, he cannot use it for any other purpose. As soon as
the book is purchased , the currency goes to  the bookshop owner. It again becomes
fungible. So, it  is only for that period that fungibility is limited . Supposedly he does  not
spend, it goes back to the school , and fungibility is restored. So, it is a way of
controlling expenditure that you do not ge t unless it  is digital and that you do not get
unless it  is a token . It is a facility that is used  and the facility will typically be agreed
upon by both the recipient as well as the person who puts that condition. So, to give a
very short answer, programm ability does  not militate against  fungibility, it  is only a
specific use binding, thank you.
Shaktikanta  Das:
And to extend that reply further , imagine a situation when CBDC is fully implemented
at a later date, if the Government wants to give some cash support to certain
individuals for a specific purpose , programmability will be useful in such situations . So,
the money, the cash, which is going from the Government to such persons can be
used for specified purposes. So, it  is typical for every household at the beginning of
the month to do their budget and set aside money , one envelope for school fees, one
envelope for electricity bills, and it happens, it  is a common thing which happens in a
large number of households.
9 Yogesh Dayal:
Thank you Sirs. I will request Manojit Saha from Business Standard  to ask his
question .
Manojit  Saha , Business  Standard:
I again go back to Para 21 on liquidity. You said, your stance is with respect to rates
and incomplete transmission. Does that mean that you are creating elbow  room to do
liquidity operations , and OMO purchase s to infuse liquidity because March is going to
be very tight ? Such liquidity operation s will not be seen as out of sync with the stance .
So, y ou are separating the stance from liquidity management, and you are saying it is
only on rates. Does that give you elbow room to do OMO purchase s when liquidity will
be very tight in March?
Shaktikanta  Das:
What we have attempted to do today is to clarify and  clearly state that  we do not read
the stance of Monetary Pol icy in terms of excess liquidity prevailing or deficit liquidity
prevailing . That is not the point. Liquidity plays a secondary role to support the
Monetary Policy transmission . That is what the DG Dr. Patra explained in the beginning
itself that we try to keep the liquidity at a level wherein the overnight call rate , which is
the operating target of monetary policy , remains around the repo rate. In the first part
of this year, due to various exog enous factors, there was a lot of liquidity. So, we
conducted variable rate repo auctions, but the market took time to adjust . The m arket ,
banks, and individual banks also make their analysis of the liquidity situation and that
analysis by the banks also varies within a day. You look at a couple of days back , we
did two VRRR auctions . The response to the first one was very low, some ₹4,000 crore
but then the same day we did one more and we got a response of ₹27,000 crore . So,
between the morning auction when the banks offered ₹4,000 crore and a subsequent
auction in the afternoon , where the banks offered ₹27,000 crore.  So, due to various
autonomous factors, the liquidity situation has been fluctuating in the market. Banks
make their assessments. Banks also take their own decision s. The banks and the
markets take time to adjust to the evolving liquidity situation. So far as the RBI is
concerned, we will remain active. We wi ll remain nimble in our liquidity management.
What instrument , we will utilise, will depend on the prevailing situation, which will come
up from time to time. I cannot say that we will use this not use this. We have several
instruments at our disposal. Dep ending on the situation , we will use the most
appropriate instrument.
Yogesh  Dayal:
I will move on to Mr. Brajesh Kumar from Zee Business News.
Brajesh  Kumar , Zee Business  News:
Sir, you have talked about hidden cost s in loan s. What is your feedback on hidden
costs? What do you want to say about hidden cost s? Would you like to talk about
10 processing fees , the charges of lawyers , the charges of architect s, or the insurance
charges when they make it mandatory ? So, what are the things in hidden cost s and
will there be a uniform format which all the banks ha ve to follow?
Shaktikanta  Das:
I have not use d the hidden cost term at all. At this time the loans , which banks sanction
all the charges are specified  in the term sheet – what will be the processing  fees, what
will be fees, what all the charges ? Everything is specified but an ordinary borrower
does  not read all the terms and conditions of four to five pages. They just see that they
are getting loans at the interest of 5% to 10% . When they take the lo an, all the things
are specified in the terms and conditions but c ustomers do not read th em properly.
That is why , we mandated already in microfinance lending and digital lending that a
simple fact statement in which we have said that an annuali sed all -inclusive rate
should be mentioned . Suppose your interest rate could be 5% but upfront you pay a
fee of suppose ₹1,000, so, I am paying ₹1,000 today but the loan is for five years .
₹1,000 instead of giving in five years , I am giving it upfront so the annuali sed interest
rate of that will be more . The common borrower do es not understand that  and that is
for the sake of clarity and transparency , we have mandated it . It is in the interest of
customers and still , the banks are giving th at information. There is no hidden cost and
they have not hidden anything.  Let us be very clear. The banks terms and conditions
are very transparent in the sense that all information is given. But my experience is
that we do  not read it properly , which  is why we have mand ated a simple term sheet
or a key fact statement purely in customers ’ interest . I am sure banks will encourage
it because banks are long -term players , they are not short -term operators .
M. Rajeshwar Rao :
The Governor has explained the way we have made an effort to prescribe this to banks
as well for the retail customers and MSME s. The key fact sheet will be mandated and
with this earlier also , you must have seen about the issue of credit card s when we
have mandated the most important terms and conditions t o give greater transparency
so this policy also we have announced accordingly.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sirs. Piyush Shukla from The Financial Express.
Piyush Shukla , The Financial Express :
Sir, just taking you back to where we started. DG Sir said that there are various tools
in the kitty with regard to Paytm . How the future course of action will be taken. Sir, very
specifically, banks are becoming hesitant to partner with this bank  – Paytm Payments
Bank  – for shifting their customers and their merchants in one go. They are saying that
we need regulatory approval for that. So, will you provide that, and will you allow the
sale of their wallet to other potential payment  banks ?
11 Swaminathan  J.:
It will be very difficult to provide any hypothetical answers at this point in time. As I said
there is still time that is provided for customers to continue to access the services that
are provided. So, during this period, we will see what else needs to be done and as
the Governor also said we keep the customer at the cent re of what needs to be done.
So, we will take appropriate step s.
The second part of your question is in terms of what the other banks will have to do. It
is a business decision. They have got to carry out the required due diligence, as per
their laid -down board -approved policies. I am sure that they will carry out that if they
have got to do a partnership. So, that is something which we will not comment on at
this point in time. But what tool and shape it will take is not something which we would
like to speculate on at this point in time. We may wait for the FAQs, which will give you
more clarity.
Piyush Shukla , The Financial Express :
So, banks do  not need regulatory approval for taking onboard Paytm customers. Is it?
Swaminathan  J.:
It is very specific to a particular item. It  is better to wait for the FAQs as the Governor
said.
Shaktikanta  Das:
Please be patient. Let the FAQ s come next week.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sirs. I will move on to Swati Bhat Shet ye from Reuters.
Swati Bhat  Shet ye, Reuters :
Today , you have said that next year's growth is projected at 7%. Nominal GDP growth
as per the budget is projected at 10.5 %. I do  not know if my math is wrong, but
effectively, that would mean inflation will be around 3.5% next year. Is that right? Are
you being a bit too optimistic about growth or is the Government underplaying growth
and being very modest in their projections?
Shaktikanta  Das:
Deputy Governor Dr . Patra may take that question .
Michael D. Patra :
I will not venture to answer for the Government . But my understanding of this is that
what goes into the nominal GDP is not CPI inflation. It  is the GDP deflator  and GDP
deflator is always a weighted combination of CPI and WPI. Now the WPI has been in
deflation for most part of this year. It  is just emerging out of deflation. So, that must be
the reason.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sirs. I will move on to Mr. Mayur  Shetty fro m The Times of India.
12 Mayur Shetty , The  Times of India:
Governor, in the development measures you spoke about reviewing the AEPS and
some banks have come out with warnings on how fingerprints can be cloned using
silicon. Is that what  has caused this thing? Since OTP is also being reviewed, does it
mean that the traditional forms of KYC are the best option for regulated entities?
Shaktikanta  Das:
No. OTP (One Time Password) is not being reviewed. What I am saying is that over
the years, it  so happens that OTP has become the most popular and commonly used
AFA (Additional Factor of Authentication ). But with the movement of time, various other
technologies and methods have come up. So, we want to just tell the players in the
field that there a re other methods also. The Reserve Bank will be agnostic to them. As
long as they are sound methods, banks and institutions are free to adopt them. Let
DG Rabi Sankar take the other part of the question with regard to the Aadhaar AEPS.
T. Rabi Sankar:
You gave the answer in your question itself. It  is basically to ensure that since this is
being used in rural and such areas, it  is important that the safety of these transactions
is ensured. Now over time, as in the case of AFA, we can use various technologi es to
do it. So, that is essentially the position here.
All touchpoint operators will go through a standardi sed safe and secure onboarding
process. We can also add, as we have indicated, other factors into it. For example,
the switch on has to be done by the customer , instead of it being pre -available on the
system, or it can have geo -limits beyond which it cannot operate, whatever is required
for the customers.
The idea is that the Reserve Bank has always been placing a lot of emphasis on the
security of  digital transactions, which we believe is key to ensuring customer adoption,
especially customers who are not savvy digitally, but this is an effort in that direction
to improve the security of transactions.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sirs. I will move on t o Mr. Hit esh Vyas from The Indian Express.
Hitesh Vyas , The Indian Express :
Sir, there is an expectation that the stance would be changed to neutral . What are the
preconditions for a stance  to become neutral?
Shaktikanta  Das:
I cannot give forward  guidance on that. When such a thing happens, we will explain
how it is. But , I will tell you the situation, the evolving  situation continues to be very
volatile and uncertain. You look at the commentaries coming out from the central
banks, mostly of advan ced countries. Sometimes they appear to be giving forward
guidance in one particular direction. Sometimes the market interprets the next
13 guidance to be in a different direction. At the moment, we are not giving any forward
guidance with regard to stance or  rate. There is a talk of when the central banks world
over will cut rates  and as I have said, markets are running ahead of the central banks.
So, preconditions, I will not be able to specify, unless DG Michael Patra wants to
comment anything on that. Beca use these are very volatile times. So, it is better to
wait and when something like that happens, we will explain it appropriately.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir. I will move on to Ms. Gopika Gopakumar from Mint.
Gopika Gopakumar , Mint:
Good afternoon Governor. Considering that your inflation forecast for next year is at
4.5% and GDP at 7% and you are saying that the RBI needs to be vigilant in the last
mile of disinflation . Does it rule out a rate cut in FY25? Secondly, on the Paytm issue,
what is the l arger issue? Is it KYC or is it something related to the ownership or
interlinkage between a regulated and a non -regulated entity ? If it is KYC , then does
the RBI need to relook at the regulations around minimum KYC accounts?
Shaktikanta Das:
We would not  like to spell out  entity -specific details . It is a bilateral engagement
between the RBI and the regulated entity. The regulations are there in their place. The
regulations are robust. It is not a case where there was a regulatory deficiency or there
was a  regulatory correction required. It is an issue of compliance, compliance with
various parameters. You mentioned  KYC, but compliance with so many aspects. So,
regulations are there, regulations are robust,  and it is a situation where we are focused
on comp liance not being there with the regulatory requirements.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir. The l ast few questions . We will invite Anurag Shah from ET NOW
Swadesh .
Anurag Shah , ET NOW Swadesh :
Namaste Sir. Over the last few months when you have expressed your concern over
the personal loans and after the risk weightage was increased . Are you still as
concern ed or has it been  reduced ? Sir, do you believe that the way personal loan s are
being given is also to be seen ? They are giving loans to everyone whether it is small
or big , minimum of two or three calls come in a day . The second question , which was
in discussion mostly for the Hindi viewers and crores of customers and merchants and
Sir, whatever you say gives confidence to the people of the country . So in future if any
disruption comes in payment bank issues, whether the RBI will be standing with force
in this issue and will you give some more clarity on this issue?
Shaktikanta Das:
I want to assure everyone that India 's financial sector, the banking sector and the
overall financial system is very strong . There is no doubt about it whether it is a banking
14 or non -banking finance company, NBFC if you see the performance of any of these
and if you see the overall parameters at the systemic level or individual level
parameters are strong. Growth is very sound and there is good momentum for growth.
But as a supervisor, as a regulated entity , we keep supervising it and in every
supervision , our effort is that whatever supervised entity whether it is a bank, NBFC or
any other financial institution , we directly engage with them . We talk to them directly
and we say that this is where you are lacking, and here you have done regulatory
violation and do the rightful thing. You take your banks or NBFC s in the right direction.
According to our regulatory guidelines , there are some deviations happening, you
correct those and take the right step s. For that , we give a lot of time as well.
I am talking in a general sense and not about a specific to a single entity and where
the action is not being taken in a timely manner or if we do  not see an effective action
there in the public interest, in customer interest, in depositors '' interest, and overall
financial system ’s interest it ; becomes necessary to take certain measures. We take
those measures because the Reserve Bank is the custodian of financial stability and
financial systems. The Reserve Bank has always been committed and will be
committed going fo rward and as you said , it is standing strong . So yes, the Reserve
Bank is standing strong.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir. Pratigya Bajpai from Informist Media and then Anshika Kayastha from
The Hindu Business Line, the last two questions.
Pratigya  Bajpai , Informist  Media:
Public debt has been high for three years now because of COVID spending by
governments across the world . So, what risk does the RBI see specifically now to raise
this as a risk factor and what are the spillover risks for this for India?
Shaktikanta Das:
I was raising this issue in a global context, not in the context of India. The India part of
the information I have given  is just by the way of information . My reply was in the global
context. You see the footnotes of my Monetary Policy Stat ement . All the supporting
data is given. By the end of this decade, global debt to GDP of EMEs, and advanced
economies all put together is expected to exceed 100%. On today's date and in future,
very surprisingly, you will notice that the debt to GDP of th e advanced economies is
much higher than the debt to GDP levels of the EMEs.  Many advanced economies ,
where the fiscal deficit is very high  in the range of 7 -8% of the GDP will keep on
borrowing . When they borrow in reserve currency then what you call it a creating new
money, printing notes. The debt has to be sustainable for the long -term stability of the
global financial system. So, I have raised this as an issue which can become a future
source of stress to the global financial system. As far as India is  concerned, please
look at my statement  again , I have provided the data in the footnote. The IMF ’s Fiscal
15 Monitor gives out data for India. The debt to GDP for India had gone up to 88%,
General Gov ernment, i.e., Centre and States together, had gone up to 8 8% during the
COVID year of 2020 because of the various fiscal measures which were undertaken .
It has already come around about 81% and b y 2028, according to the IMF's Fiscal
Monitor, it is expected to be around 80% . That is the path , which I just mentioned by
way of information.
Anshika  Kayastha , The Hindu  Business Line:
Sir, this is not about Paytm, but about UPI. There were talks about restricting and
capping the market share of each app in terms of UPI transaction , and volume share .
We have seen the deadline was extended and the market share has only gone up for
these platforms. Now we are seeing that Paytm -led migration happened to some of
these platforms like Google Pay and PhonePe, and their market share is increasing.
Is there a  concern regarding, say, over -reliance on a few specific platforms and does
that raise the risk of them becoming too big , could be a systemically important payment
aggregator entity or something like that ? One small clarification, you mentioned the
overnig ht two VRRRs in the day, is there a specific amount or range that the RBI has
in mind that you would prefer that banks not park their funds beyond that in SDF?
Shaktikanta Das:
I think DG Ra bi Sankar, followed by DG Michael Patra . Two questions, but the last
mile in the queue should always have priority.
T. Rabi Sankar :
Yes, since it is the last question, I will keep it very short. The limit is from the point of
view of diffusion of risk , in case some entity does  not become available for whatever
reason at any point in time . But, to take it too big to fail is probably not appropriate
here because they are just third-party  app providers . The limit of 30% of funds do es
not go through them. The system is not threatened except that there could be a
temporary inconvenience in terms of shifting over to an additional system. It will be for
the market to decide, the market forces have to play out such that this percentage is
more evenly decided. We  will not be interfering with them in the market process to
ensure that 30% or something . In any case, it is an NPCI requirement . We will have
more players to come in. Hopefully , with technology , we will get some more players
and that percentage can be mai ntained. We have time till the end of this year anyway.
Michael D. Patra:
We do  not have any preconceived limit s on how much they put in SDF. The SDF by
its very nature is the standing facility and it is at the discretion of market participants
as to how m uch they want to use . As to why we did two VRRR s during the day, we
assess ed market conditions and bidding behavio ur and in the first option , we reali sed
that the re were like bids, which were higher than the amount we offered. We offered
16 50, we got a lot more, so we thought that probably they would like to park more in the
VRRR s, which is more remunerative than the SDF, so we did the second one.
Shaktikanta Das:
DG Swaminathan wants to add some thing.
Swaminathan  J.:
Just one clarification on UPI because t he question came around the UPI apps. See
this particular action is against the payment bank. It is not to be confused with the
payment app which is done right? That is okay. We will clarify this through the FAQs .
But just to clarify in terms of your question just as supplemental information that as an
app is not impacted by this action.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you, Sirs. With this, we come to a formal close of the press conference, the first
press conference of the year and looking forward to more  during the year .
All the best to you. Thank you for coming. Thank you.