1 Edited Transcript of the Reserve Bank of India’s Press Conference
After Central Board Meeting  on February 12, 2024
Yogesh Dayal:
Good afternoon and welcome to this Press Conference after the Central Board
Meeting where the FM address ed the RBI Cent ral Board . Also, we had the launch of
UPI today in two countries . Before we go ahead with the questions, I will request the
Governor to give his Opening Remarks .
Shaktikanta Das:
Good afternoon. I would like to welcome all of you to this Press Conference.
Today,  we had two major events. We had the meeting of the Central Board of the
Reserve Bank  this morning and the Finance Minister  addressed the Central Board of
the Reserve Bank . As is the normal practice, a fter every budget, this meeting is held
in Delhi, wherein the Finance Minister  addresses the Central Board of the Reserve
Bank  and also interacts with the entire Board.  It was held in the morning. The Finance
Minister  touched upon the key priorities of the document as highlighted in the budget,
the way forward which the budget has projected for the various future policies and
measures that the Government proposes to take in vari ous sectors. The members of
the Central Board congratulated the Finance Minister  for presenting a very responsible
and forward- looking budget. They shared their ideas and thoughts on the budget with
the Finance Minister . The Finance Minister  was accompanied by the two Union
Ministers of State for Finance,  the other secretaries from the Finance Ministry  and the
Chief Economic Advisor . The names of participants, etc ., are getting released in our
Press Notes so you will see that .
The second major event that we had is precisely the reason why we had to reschedule this Press Conference to the afternoon because as you would be aware the Prime
Minister launched the linkage of our UPI with the Fast Payment System of Mauritius ,
and the s imilar system in Sri Lanka . The Press Note for that has already been released
a little while ago. The Finance Minister  could not again come back in the afternoon
and that  is the reason why we had to reschedule the press conference. What was
today launched in the presence of the Honou rable Prime Ministers of India and
Mauritius  and the H onou rable President of Sri Lanka were two things.
With respect to Sri Lanka, those,  who have UPI facilities o n their mobile phones, can
use the QR Codes in various merchant establishments in Sri Lanka to make a digital
payment through UPI.
With respect to Mauritius , you can use what has been enabled today . Utilising the
mobile phone and the QR Code with merchants and other establishments in Mauritius
and reciprocal arrangement s over here also. If there is a visitor from Mauritius , he can
also use his mobile and use the UPI QR Code over here and make payments , so it is
reciprocal. It is in both countries .
Similarly , the RuPay card also. An Indian trave ller to Mauritius carrying a RuPay Card
will be able to utilise it for making both payments as well as at the ATMs to draw cash 2 in Mauritius. Similarly, residents of Mauritius , when they visit India,  even if they do not
visit, will also be issued similar RuPay  Card s by banks which are in Mauritius. So,
Mauritius  trave llers to India carrying RuPay Card s issued by the banks in Mauritius
can use the RuPay  card for both digital payments in the POS machines and they can
also use it in the ATM s to draw cash. B roadly , these are the facilities which have been
launched.
Very interestingly, I would like to point out that Sri Lanka is the third SAARC  country
with which India has entered into this arrangement . The other two are Nepal and
Bhutan, where we already have had this facility for quite some time now.
Mauritius, as was pointed out by the Hono urable Prime Minister in his address that
Mauritius is the first African country with which UPI is now going to operate and we
have entered into that kind of arrangement.
It is very important to note that all these measures  are in pursuance of the G20
Principle s agreed during the Indian Presidency to increase the footprint  and the role
of digital public infrastructure across countries . India has played a very pioneering role
in promoting digital public infrastructure within India whether it is the UPI or other digital
infrastructure like C oWIN or so many other examples . You are all very aware. N ow, it
is our endeavou r to enter into coll aboration and cooperation with other countries so
that the digital public infrastructure benefits are available to people across the countries . Being the first African country with which we have entered into this
arrangement, it also can act as a gateway f or taking our UPI payment systems into
other African countries  but that is a work in progress.
I would like to stop here. These are some of the initial observations  I wanted to make.
Now it  is open to questions or comments.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir for those opening remarks . I will invite Shri Lakshman Roy, CNBC
Awaaz .
Lakshman Roy, CNBC Awaaz :
Sir, this is with reference to the UPI agreement we have with the two countries . Could
you tell us about how many countries we are under discussion of making similar agreements within the next calendar year and would this impact the forex  as well?
Secondly, since we are giving impetus to UPI , there is one issue which is coming up
after this action on,  Paytm , though I would not like to talk about any specific company .
I would like to know what message the RBI want s to give to fintech companies after
this inciden t? Though Paytm has taken certain measures to analy se this so will the
RBI review their decision?
Shaktikanta Das:
As far as the second question is concerned,  what the RBI thinks about fintech. Perhaps
you might not have attended/seen the press conference we held in Mumbai last week
after our Monetary Policy  meeting. Many of your colleagues were present physically
and many of you must have seen this on television as well or you must have seen it on the RBI’s YouTube channel . The RBI is always supportive of  the fintech sector . Not
just supportive but the RBI ’s intention and objective is that the fintech sector should 3 grow more and more. But the fintech sector has an important role to play because
lakhs and crores of customers are involved in that and many of the facilities are such
that they put money in wallet s. The interest of depositors and customers is of prime
importance. Financial stability is of prime importance. If you are operating in a regulated environment , then you will have to abide by the regulations to run the
business. The RBI has always been supportive of fintech  and has been promoting it .
Going forward also, the  RBI will be promoting the fintech. If you look at  our track record
over the last few years , you will see that the RBI has played an important role in
spreading awareness  about UPI . We have introduced a Regulatory Sandbox four
years ago. I f there is any new, innovative idea or any new technology or any new
fintech application,  they can trial that in the Regulatory Sandbox and can get
authori sation from the RBI and can take it forward.  We have set up the RBI Innovation
Hub in Bangalore. You can see that digital loans and digital lendings are getting
popular all over the world. There are very few central banks which have issued digital
lending guidelines and that is done by the RBI. So, the RBI is always supportive and
will promote the fintech ecosystem and as I have said the other day in the press
conference there are no doubts t hat the RBI will not support the fintech.
As you asked the question about Paytm , we have said that this week we are going to
release FAQ s. My request is that you wait till th e FAQs get released. The decision we
take in the Reserve Bank takes after a long thought process  of around one year, or
two years . We keep engaging all the relevant entities whether it is banks, payment
banks, NBFCs, or cooperative banks. I am not talking about Paytm . I am talking in
general . If we take any action against any entity , we interact with them for months and
sometime s the interaction goes on for two to three years. W hen we do not see any
effective corrective measures by them , then only we take action. So after thinking
about it a lot , we have taken this decision. The word which you used “ review ” is not an
appropriate word here and along with that , I would like to say that FAQ s which we are
issuing , please wait for that. Our priority is that depositors or customers should not
face any kind of inconvenience,  that is why we have given time of one month. We have
taken the action on 31
st January, and we have given time till 29th February. The time
is given because the depositor ’s interest or the customer ’s interest is the utmost
priority for us. We have given one month's  time bec ause if the depositors or the
customers want to make  any adjustments or transitions,  they can do so.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you S ir. Now I will invite Shri Prashant a Sahu from The Financial Express.
Prashant a Sahu, The Financial  Express:
This was the first board meeting after the budget  was presented on 1st February . The
budget has  promised faster fiscal consolidation than was anticipated.  So, what
implication s does it have on the overall economy and also Monetary Policy ?
Shaktikanta Das:
The Government embarks on a path of fiscal consolidation and adheres to the fiscal
road map that it has set out. Obviously,  it means that the borrowing is kept within
certain limits, and this year's borrowing numbers are also lower than what initially the
markets had expected. A lower quantum of borrowing would basically mean two things : 4 Firstly, i t would ensure that more reso urces are left in the banking system to meet the
requirements of the private sector  which  will be a growth -inducing measure. More
credit should be available to the private sector to make their investments.
Secondly, w hen the borrowing is less , naturall y, it has an impact on the bond markets,
and on the bond yields. The quantum of borrowing is very important for the Monetary
Policy also. I have mentioned in various Monetary Policy Stat ement s that different
segments of the bond market have reacted differently  to the Monetary P olicy actions
of the Reserve Bank . The transmission varies from segment  to segment. So,  the
quantum of borrowing is very important for the Monetary P olicy. While making
Monetary Pol icy, it is one of the factors which is taken into consideration. I would say
it is growth -inducing and it has some positive impact  in the sense that  it will help to
sort of stabili se inflation. How much it will help to stabili se, I would not like to quantify,
but it does help to stabili se inflation and it  should help in moderating the inflation levels.
Yogesh Dayal :
Thank you Sir . I will now call Ms. Sapna Das from  CNBC TV18.
Sapna Das, CNBC TV18:
Good evening Governor . You mentioned that market borrowing is good for the market ,
however, if you look at the interest payments in terms of borrowings  they have been
inching up year-on-year.  There are historical reasons  also. T he fact remains that we
do not have a debt benchmark anymore. It was 40% for the Central Government , 20%
for State Governments , put together 60%  in the pre- COVID period. We are
somewhere around 81- odd, this is what you indicated in your press conference last
week. Is it a concern that there is no debt benchmark to be reached, like the fiscal
deficit ? Any thoughts on this front and how this stickiness can come down and anything
that you have been suggesting to the Government of India?
Shaktikanta Das:
What we have been, as the Reserve Bank , suggesting to the Government of India is
bilateral and that is  direct communication between the Central Bank and the Finance
Ministry . So, I would not like to touch upon that. But , the two other aspects which you
have mentioned are the rising interest  payments and the Government debt.
When the inflation is high, naturally the Central Bank has to take monetary policy
action by increasing the rate. So,  the Government Bor rowings which are done during
that period, naturally the borrowing costs will be higher because the yields w ould be
higher. As we move forward, as inflation has started moderating, l ogically the final point
will be where the bond yields  also come down. L ooking at the 10- year bond yield, i n
May 2022 when we started this rate hike cycle, the 10- year bond yield was  7.14% or
so. Today the 10- year bond yields are hovering in the range of 7.1 7-7.18% . But in
between the bond yield had gone up to 7. 30-7.40% and it had remained there for some
time. So, it is a function of your inflation level and the quantum of liquidity available in
the system. If you recall, in the first year of COVID, due to the efforts of the Reserve
Bank and all those steps we had taken, t he borrowing cost was one of the lowest so
far as the Government borrowing was concerned.  In the intermittent period, the
interest payments are linked to the bond yields . So going forward, when inflation is 5 brought under control, bond yields will soften and the borrowing cost of the
Government debt also should come down. The 10-year bond yields  have already
started softening and the 5- year yields also . The bulk  of the Government borrowing is
in these two buckets.
The other point which you mentioned was about  the debt  benchmark . At the peak of
COVID, the General Gover nment Debt-GDP ratio, i.e., the Central Government and
the State Government s put together , was about 88%. That was the peak which was at
the time of COVID pandemic. That is because the Government had to give a lot of
fiscal  support  to the people and various sectors of the economy because of the
challenges coming from COVID. So, the Debt -GDP ratio of the General Gov ernment
had gone up to 88%. Now it has come down to about 81% or so.  With the fiscal
consolidation roadmap, the Government is following the target of reaching 4.5% in
2025- 26, I would expect the debt -to-GDP also to start moderating.
Incidentally, it is a very important point which was mentioned in my Monetary Policy
Statement. I had devoted one paragraph to the problem of the G overnment debt in the
context of the global economy. The global Debt -GDP ratio is expected to cross 100%
by 2030, but even now the Debt -GDP  of advanced economies is far higher than the
Debt -GDP  of emerging market economies  (EMEs) . EMEs are today in a position to
respond far better to the needs of fiscal consolidation  and India is definitely at  the
forefront of that path of fiscal consolidation, which EMEs as a group are now following.
Yogesh Dayal :
I will move on to Shri Siddharth Upasani from Moneycontrol.
Siddharth Upasani , Moneycontrol :
A couple of quick questions. Post-budget the Finance Secretary had said that the 40%
Debt -GDP ratio target that the review committee had suggested, is a historical relic
and it  is from the pandemic time. So t here is a need for a reexamination. Where do
you stand on that? And second, just on bond yields, will you expect any inflows into
the G overnment debt to rise post -June once it  is listed on JPMorgan in terms of the
FAR security?  While we know that the RBI t akes a close look at the bond yields,
especially when they are rising, what about when they are falling? If they do fall quite
a bit once these inflows come in, is there any mechanism that you have in mind to
manage sharp drops in yields?
Shaktikanta Das:
I am not aware of what the Finance Secretary has said. On the issue of 40% , whether
it is valid today or not, I do not want to comment . There was a Government Committee
which had been appointed which had recommended 40%  plus 20% , 40% for the
centre and 20%  for States. So, the Government has to take a call. What is the level of
sustainable debt as far as  Government finances are concerned?
RBI is the debt manager to the Government and whatever view the Government takes
with regard to their borrowing requirements, RBI's responsibility is to ensure a non-
disruptive completion of the borrowing program me of that particular year. But certainly,
the Debt -GDP ratio is a very critical issue in the fiscal consolidation roadmap. I f you
go by the fiscal deficit target, which the Government has itself followed against a 6 budget estimate of 5.9% , the RE is 5.8 % and the general expectation was probably
the fiscal deficit would be this year 5.2% . The market was expecting 5.2- 5.4% , but it is
5.1% . There is every reason to believe that the Government will adhere to the path of
fiscal consolidation. Whether 30, 40, or 50%, I would not like to comment on that.
With regard to the JPMorgan Bond Index, various estimates are being made by the
market. There are also suggestions by participants in the market that some of it has
already come in. We have seen in the recent months constant inflows both in the FDI
and in the FPI route. FPI route is  very robust incidentally. I have given the figures in
the Monetary Policy Statement . US$32 billion is the net FPI inflow against an outflow
of US$6.5 billion last year in the corresponding period.  So, FPI flows are robust . How
much actually will come through JPMorgan? We will have to wait and see and it is not
as if it is all going to come in a single burst. It will come over a period of time.
RBI has managed, both when there are outflows and when there are inflows . In both
situations , the Reserve Bank has got an excellent track record of managing flows.
Going forward, even this year also, we are confident of handling the, what you are
referring to, the expected inflows. As and when such a thing materiali ses, we will be
able to deal with it.
Regarding bond yields, as you will appreciate as a Central B ank Governor , I would not
like to say how much should be the bond yield whether it will go up or go down, because that is a signal to the market. We do not like to give, or interfere in the market.
The rates should be decided in the market. The Reserve Bank cannot and should not
indicate that . It is only in a crisis like COVID,  we announced the GSAP and all that.
But that was an exceptional situation. But on a normal basis, the Reserve Bank  likes
to leave th e market to determine what should be the bond yield. So,  I would not like to
comment on the yield curve in the future.
Yogesh Dayal :
We will move on to Shri Banikinkar Pattanayak  from The Economic Times.
Bani kinkar Pattanayak, The Economic Times :
Sir, what is your view on the budget's sustained focus on capital expenditure, I mean,
for the fourth year in a row? I wanted to follow up on Lakshman's question. Two
countries with which we had a UPI arrangement today, so are there more in the offing,
and which are those countries?
Shaktikanta Das:
There are several countries with which we are under discussion, both the Reserve
Bank and the NPCI International, which is the international wing of the NPCI . There is
a subsidiary company of NPCI to handle thei r international business. W e are in
dialogue with a number of countries. The list of countries and the names I would not
like to mention because there is a country on the other side. He may or may not like
their country being mentioned in our press conference. So, as and when something
gets finali sed, you will automatically come to know about it.
With regard to CAPEX. It is a GDP multiplier. The research has shown that the GDP
multiplier of capital expenditure is about 1.2,  going up to about 1.4. It has a multiplier
effect on the GDP. A thrust on capital expenditure is always welcome. I have stated in 7 my Monetary Policy Statement also that Government capital expenditure will support
the GDP growth.
Yogesh Dayal :
I will now request  Shri Tarun Sharma from ZEE Business  to ask his question.
Tarun Sharma , ZEE Business:
Sir, I have two questions. First ly, the green energy print. The Government has a plan
to net zero by 2070 and the recommendation from the Power Ministry to the RBI to
include green energy funding as a priority lending above ₹ 30 crores. There is some
relaxation in the provisioning for green energy finance. Second, recently you iss ued
the discussion paper on the capping of dividends part. Is there any discussion in the
Board meeting because the DEA has some concerns about  the dividend capping plan,
especially for the P SU?
Shaktikanta Das:
You have said what the Power  Ministry has said, what the DEA views are and so.  I am
not aware actually of all these.  But keeping that aside, we examine these aspects.
Ministries of the Government have their views. They share their views with us. We will
take them into consideration. Whatever decision appears to be appropriate, we will
take that. But it will naturally be based on a lot of discussion with various stakeholders .
Ministries of the Government are certainly stakeholders. I do not want to speculate on
the request or suggestion of the Power Ministry or the Finance Ministry on dividends,
etc. January 31st was the last day. W e get comments in the hundreds. So, they have
to be examined carefully . As and when we m ake a decision, you will know about it.
Yogesh Dayal :
I will call now Shri Radha Raman Mishra from PTI -Bhasha.
Radha Raman  Mishra, PTI-Bhasha:
My question is related to what someone has asked earlier . Do you see other countries
showing interest in the RuPay card?
Shaktikanta Das:
Yes, there is a lot of interest.
Radha Raman  Mishra, PTI-Bhasha:
Sir, o ne more question and it is a little bit different. My colleague has lost , due to a
fraud,  around ₹1.50- 1.75 lakhs a few days back from his  bank account and it took him
half an hour to reach to the customer care . He could not reach to the customer care
for half an hour and till that time his money was debited from his account. D o you have
any plans to launch a platform where we complain of a fraud and they take cogni sance
of the same immediately?
Shaktikanta Das:
For cybercrime,  a platform is already there.  There is one common platform 1930,
where you can lodge a complaint . Cyber security is a genuine problem and there are
two types of situation. One situation is such where the customer believes that this is a genuine message as they get a message from the bank , and sometimes
absentmindedly and by mistake they share the OTP or share their personal data and 8 then the fraud happens. That is why you must have seen that banks keep on sending
SMSes  to the account holders and on behalf of the RBI, we have already advertised
that do not share any kind of personal information. If you get the message from the
banks that if you click on this link your KYC will be done, banks never do that. You
should contact directly with the branch where you are holding the bank account. This is one type of situation where customers by mistake do such a thing and the fraud
happens and money get s debited. We have mandated that if you directly complain to
the bank within 24 hours of fraud at the bank ’s complaint management portal and if
the mistake is made by the bank then they will refund you your full money . We have
issued that circular but that is the situation of cyber security.
The s econd situation is where they commit  fraud by hacking.  In that direction we have
taken a lot of measures. In the  Reserve Bank and related ministr ies of the
Government , we keep on discussing these issues on how to strengthen the system,
and how can we prevent fraud. I would like to tell that you we have been blocking lots
of hacking attempts and fraud attempts but those information we do not divulge into
the public domain and do not publici se. There are a lot of hacking attempts happening.
All financial institutions face a lot of hacking attempts but we build a  firewall to protect
those. In this direction,  many efforts are to be made and a lot of work is to be done.
We are going forward in that direction through consultation with  law enforcement
agencies and concerned ministries like the Home Ministry, Finance Ministry and
Ministry of IT . We all participate in that to discuss how to strengthen this and what
measures to be taken and we are giving high priority to this.
Lakshman Roy, CNBC AWAAZ :
One small clarification regarding the Paytm question. Have we understood correctly ?
You said that there is no or there is little scope for review of the Paytm decision?
Shaktikanta Das:
I only said that we take all decisions after a lot of consideration, after  a lot of analysis.
That is all I have said.
Let me be very clear. There is no review of the decision. If you are expecting a review
of the decision, let me very clearly  tell you  that there is no review of the decision. FAQ s
which we are proposing to issue are targeting the inconvenience or the issues faced
by the customers and the depositors like all the FASTag holders , the wallet users or
the account holders. Whatever issues are under the customer interest , we are dealing
with in the FAQs, but the review of the decision is not on the table.  Please do not make
any headlines out of this because this is a routine process. Two very big positive steps
have been taken,  one is the discussion we had about the budget in the Central Bo ard
and the international linkage of UPI which  is very important. You are asking, again and
again,  that is why I have said that do not expect any review s in the FAQ s. We are
addressing all the questions from the customers ’ point of view.
Yogesh Dayal :
The last two questions. A anchal Magazine and As it Ranjan  Mishra .
Aanchal Magazine,  Indian Express  9 My question was the follow -up of that only, that you are saying there is only a review
of the decision?
Shaktikanta Das:
Now you are saying. I did not say.
Aanchal Magazine:
Okay.
Shaktikanta Das:
Let me explain what I meant. What I meant was that a decision is taken after much
consideration. It  is not as if we decide today and start reviewing it tomorrow. When we
take a decision, we examine all the pros and cons, all angularities ; and all aspects are
examined. After a lot of thought, internal deliberation, internal discussions, and
interactions  with the regulated entity, decisions are taken. Decisions are not taken in
a casual manner. Decisions are taken in t he most serious manner in the public  interest.
That is what I wanted to highlight.
Aanchal Magazine:
I was on the fact that whether there has been an extension for the customers ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Wait for the FAQ s, please.
Aanchal Magazine:
And the other part is, today we are expecting inflation data.
Shaktikanta Das:
Let us see. Off the record, I can tell you how much we are expecting. But you should
wait for another 1.5 hour s. You will know the figure. W e have our own internal estimate,
but I would rather  wait for the official number.
Yogesh Dayal :
I will call now Shri Asit Ranjan Mishra  from Business  Standard.
Asit Ranjan Mishra, Business Standard:
Sir, since you have the Paytm issues . Since you are saying there is no review, does it
mean that nothing is …?
Shaktikanta Das:
Now, you are saying. Please leave Paytm and move on. There are so many positive
things happening in the country. So many things the RBI is doing on financial inclusion
and digital payment s. Nobody asked me about this KFS, the Key Fact Statement which
we have mandated. That is a very big step in the interest of small borrowers, retail
borrowers and MSME borrowers. The Key Fact Statement, I explained at  the Monetary
Policy Press Conference. That  is a major customer -centric measure. So many good
things are happening. So, let  us move forward.
Asit Ranjan Mishra, Business Standard:
Yes. I have a small clarification only. Sir, since there is no review, then the logical next
step will be the withdrawal of the license.  10 Shaktikanta Das:
I do not want to speculate on this thing.
Asit Ranjan Mishra, Business Standard:
On the GDP, you have projected 7% growth, but most of the analysts are saying
between 6 to 6.5% . The Finance  Secretary on the record has said he had factored in
6% for the Budget Statement. So , what gives you the confidence that 7% growth will
be achieved next year?
Shaktikanta Das:
We explained it in great detail in the Monetary Policy statement. The momentum of
economic activity continues to be strong and whether it is the aggregate demand or
on the investment side, the overall momentum of economic activity continues to be
strong. Our analysis shows that the GDP growth next year, i.e., 2024- 25 will touch 7%.
Only the future will tell what is the right GDP growth for '24- '25.
But if you just look back over the last two years, we were ahead of the analysts and
the analysts had to subsequently adjust their number s to our numbers. The actual
number even for the current year is coming a little higher than what I had said in
October. At that time, many people thought that the RBI was over-projecting.
But on a serious note, the future  will tell us what the actual number is . We have
confidence that it should be 7% in 2024- 25 mainly because the overall momentum of
economic activity is strong. I do not want to repeat the points which are already there
in the MPC statement which I made last Thursday.
Yogesh Dayal :
With this, we come to the close of the press conference. Thank you all for being here.
Till next time, thank you and all the best.
Shaktikanta Das:
Thank you.