RBSBRVE BANK OF IMlU BUId8XIN
EMERGING ECONOMIC SITUATION
R N. Malhotra*
I appreciate the oppomity given to
me by the coanmerce and industry fralemity d
cahtta to speak 00 you once again on th: thane
of the ~~ ecunomic si'tu8tion and tbe
monetary and credit policy of the Rcsuve Bank
of India.
As I my tbe current economic sccne, I find
that thae are several strong fmdamentals as well
as same areas of major concern During the past
decade, the average growth rate of the economy
was 5.6 per cent per mum, and the ecanomy
bmke out of tbe long-term vend growth rate of
3.5 per cent per mum. The average rate of
inflation measured by the wbolesde Price Index
was 7.7%. During the last four years of the
Seventh Plan expats were buoyant and grew at
the rate of ova 10 per cent in volume terms.
However, the 1980s also saw growing fiscal
imbalances and widening current account deficits
on external account.
Takmg of the immediate period, the wnmy
performed reasonably well in 1989-90, with the
gross dome.stic product (at 1980-81 prices)
registering a further growth of 4.5 per cent on top
of an impressive growth of 10.4 per cent in 1988-
89. Agricultural production improved by 1.5 per
cat following a record rise of 20.8 per cent in
1988-89. Industrial production also exhibited a
satisfactory increme of 8.3 pa cent in 1989-90.
Data on investment intentions of the private
businese mtcx rrrd those on its estimated capital
cxpaditures in 1989 showed ccwsiderable
buoyancy. The primary as well as seumdary
capital market exhibited considerable spurt in
activity with @taI imw3 by non-C)wemInent
public limited ccmpauiee doubling froen Rs.3.164
AdQcu by R N. kblbom, &womor, tp Msmbsn of
b~dchmba~f~radhd~,~
~Chombmor~aldtbeBbrrvtQMba
ofCarn~1t~oa~6.1QPO. crore in 1988-89 to Rs.6344 cran in 1989-90 and
the average index of equity prices rising sharply
by 45.2 per cent in 1989-90 on top of a 19.4 per
cent rise in the previous year. The external sectur
showed an impssive performance : a 36.3 per
ceot rise in exports and a 25.6 pw dent increme
in imparts giving a slight reduction in &a& deficit
in rupee terms. Even in US dollar arad SDR terms,
the growth of exports accelerated strongly, import
growth decelerated, and the trade Wiit fell. With
invisible receipts main- at tbe previous year's
levels, the ratio of cumnt account Mcit decli-
ned from 2.7 per cant in 1988-89 to 2.3 par cent
in 1989-90. There was also a fall in the debt-
service ratio fram 24 pcr cat in 1987-88 to 23
per cent in 1988-89 and further to about 22 per
in 1989-90.
Prospects for 1990-91
The growth prospects for 1990-91,
particularly in the commodity-producing sectors,
seem encouraging. With an exceptionally good
monsoon, well distributed over time and space, the
outlook for agricultural production is decidedly
encouraging. The foodgrains production target of
176.5 million tom is likely to be exceeded.
Khurif foodgiains production is estimated to be
over 101 million tonnes against a target of 95.0
million tonnes and with the favourable weather
conditions for Rabi sowings, the Rabi output may
exceed the target of 81.5 million tames. Almost
all cash crops, namely, raw cam, jute,
sug~t~:anc, oilsee&, tea and cuff=, ore likely to
record impnssive pedfcxmance. Thus, the
economy is poi& far a record production of
foodgrains rrnd other mps for tbe third year in
wcctssion.
The inM of industrial production dwiq the
first five months April-August 1990 baa shown a
hi~growthof124parantrsrgrinirs3.8pa 1 76 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA Bm FG~~VWY 1991
cent in the comparable period of 1989-90. The
manufacturing sector experienced a si-cant
growth of 14.2 per cent against 1.5 per cent in
the previous year; the infrastructural sector,
however, showed a deceleration in the growth
rate. The overall growth of industrial production
of 12.4 per cent dmng the first five months of
1990-91 is, however, over a low base and this
would show a deceleration in the remaining
months of the current financial year.
During the first half of the current financial
year, the capital market has witnessed
condderable buoyancy in the secondary market
but the trend in the primary market was subdued.
Several companies with large-size projects, which
wae given approvals in the previous two years,
came to the market for raising capital during
1989-90, and this led to the substantial growth in
the primary market. Such a high level of capital
issues has of course not been sustained in the
currcmt year. Equity prices have witnessed a rise
of over 40 per cent during the period April-
October 1990. Other indications of the investment
climate also show a mixed trend. Disbursements
of all-India fmial institutions during April-
September 1990 increased by 1 1.0 per cent as
compared with a decline of 3.3 per cent in the
cosresponding period of the previous year. While
industrial licencts and letters of intent issued were
somewhat lower, the approvals for foreign
collaboration were higher during the same period.
'IBcre has been a deterioration in the
performmra of the external sector 'in the current
financial year. During the first five months of
1990-91, the pace a. export growth in rupee terms
wa8 22.5 per cmt as against 38.1 per cent during
the wmpmdhg paiod of the previous year; in
US dolk texma the deceleration was from 16.7
par cont in the fm five months of 1989-90 to
15.4 pa cent in the comparable period of the
curmnt vw. Tbe impart gnrwth in rupee terms
iP the anent year up to Augast 1990 was at 21.2
per cent a agriast 18.5 per cent during the
campable period of last ytu; in US dollar terms
IBe incrarsc waa 14.2 pa mt this year against
dy 0 .2 per cent 1M year. This has nsulted
iin r wW&g of the trdb ddicit. Though presswes on the balanm of payment8 have
persisted for some years as reflected in a widening
current account deficits, considerable incr~~~t in
external debt and a rise in debt service ratio; the
steep rise in the price of unporobd crude oil and
petroleum products following the unexpected Gulf
crisis has donted the country with a difficult
situation. This developmmt coma at a time when
recessionary sends rue emerg& in sc#ne leading
industrialised countries. I would, howeva, wish
to assure the business wmmunily- both domestic
and foreign - that the balance of payments
situation would be kept within control and the
impeccable record in servicing external
obligations would be fully mnintrirrprl. Several
measures have been talcem towards an adjustment
and any further steps which may be necessary will
be taken to ensure the viability of the external
payments position. It is against this background
that the Reserve Bank has been canstrained to take
some measures regarding the fming of imports
by commercial banks such as the chrrging of a
higher rate of interest on credit extemdcd for the
financing of capital goods import8, prescription of
a 50 per cent margin for fmancing the import of
raw materials, and laying down more stringent
norms regarding the inventory holdings of
imported raw materials. The govcmmcnt has taken
many important measures such as the hike in
petroleum product prices, reduction of item under
the OGL and the con~traint on canalised bulk
imparts. While all these mearwes are necessary
to meet an unexpected and difl'icult situation, the
main em* on cmting the extmd account
has to be on expanding exports, Pnd industry and
trade have to play a majar role in their own best
interests. It is well known that the contribution of
large industry to exports has. been inadequate,
despite highly supportive expart incenbw and
that its export earnings have gamrally been below
its draft on ~crvct foreign exchange resources.
This must change and change fast. Them is also
evidence that there is a lag in the raoeipt of export
proceeds. Expwm need to cntllre that this lag
isreducedtothe~mn.Andallduewed
to do much mom on eaergy cxmwatia~.
To a cmuidwablc extent the wasnrl deficit
reflcc~the~fisCalimbaknecwwhkhbtrve
& Fckvrrry 1991 RESERVE BANK OF JNDIA BULIElPl 177
lPwnrrtronOl~~-ysan.~btrdgarry
Qficiffsqrsdrltyancmrartulrcoant,have
#rial8 ~calioas rsgarding clumdc debt,
growth of liquidity md inflrtioa. Apart from its
distorting effect8 on domustic saving and
iwtrrmsnt and on all project calculations,
WWim is highly inequitable in its impact as it
hits the paor the hardest and thus militates against
social justice. It is, thefore, essential that the
fhal deficits be effectively addressed.
There are several elements in the current
situation which are a cause for cancern. The
Wholesale Price Index as on Nwember 17, 1990
rhowed an increase of 10.2 per cent wer tbe
corresponding index a year ago. During the
current financial year, tbe rate of increase in the
Wholesale Price Index began to outpace last
year's iocnase somewhat before the imposition of
the 25 per cent Oulf surcharge on petroleum
products. Tbe rate of inmast in wholesale prices
in the cmre.nt financial yearup to Nwember 17,
1990, was 7.8 per cent agaiast 6.7 per cent in the
canpluable period of tbe previous fmial year.
Tbrre has not occurred this year a seasonal
decline in prices which normally sets in around
the end of August and which mainly comes about
as a result of the decline in the prices of 'primary
Micks'. F?hs of essential items such as cereals,
pulses, fruits and vegetables, eggs, fish and meat,
tea, coffee, sugar, Irh.rulnari, gw and oilseeds and
edible oil$, bave all ex@& sharp increases
despite an excellent monsoon and a third year of
bumper crops. 'The cascading effects of the hilre
m petroleum price9, coupled with the kstraints
an au~p~.~ supplies rbrough larg8l impm.6,
have given rise to furtbw qpdmsian. It should,
however, be noted that the public stocks of
foodgrains are being rebuilt to wmfu-bble levels
urd together with availability of other
commodities should restrain inflationary
expectations.
An hparmt cr\lae fa rbe pnsistmm of
iotlrthan hrs baszl the Upmidgrtsd grawdr of
tirwirtity albingfram~levdsdfiacrtdeffciu
radmamtWimofa~lrl~d
~Qk.Oivarthel~wsrsmgob
liqMilyI11111tbe~glmad~it~ T4e overall pace of moostary expansion
during the cunent financial year so far has been
subdued. Betwben the end of March 1990 and
Nwcmber 16, 1990, M, grew by 8.2 per cent,
that is, 4.6 pffcentrge poinu below the axpansion
of 12.8 per cent in the c-g perrod of
the previous year. Net bank credit to Govmment
at Rs.18,837 crore, shows an increase of 16.2 per
cent against Rs,15,610 crore or 16.1 per cat in
the comparable period of 1989-90. Net Resew
Bank credit to Central Gwernmau has also tmed
out to be somewhat higher at Rs.1 l,W5 cron as
against Rs.10,731 crore in the previou~ yw. Tbe
bank credit to the commercial sector has,
however, grown at a slower pace than in the
corresponding period last year. Non-food credit
extended by scheduled commercial banks has
registered an increase of Rs.3.261 c~orc against
Rs.8228 crore in the coffespondhg period of
1989-90, this is attributable to a number of &tors.
First, the size of nan-food credit exprnsiar .in the
past two years was unduly high. Secaadly, tbue
has occurred beaa generation of internal
resources by companies due to improved waall
corporate results during the past two years.
Thirdly, recourse to the use of --bank sources
of fmcing this year has apparently been larger.
As the business community is aware, whik.
thc immediate objectives of supporting productive
activity and containing Wonary pressures
remain the cornerstone of the Reserve Bank's
credit and monetary policies, the Bank has been
also pursuing the longer-team objectives d
promoting efficiency and ~titivarws m tbe
operations of the financial system. Towards that
end, several changes in fraancial policy have been
initiated during the past few years inciuding the
easing of apartianal cmmahts in the credit
delivery sysfan, the inmdwtim of lrtw mmey
marw irutnrmalts md !3m@K&q ob the
wristing irummalts. 178 RESERVE BANK OF lNDIA BULm FWtw?y 1991
isswd by 43 major banks as on September 21, small-scale industry and transport qxxatols with
1989, was of the order of Rs.2,480 me or 85.4 up to two vahiclcs).
per cent of the mtal limits of these banks. The
outstanding amount of CP was Rs.190 aore as Before I conclude, I ought to rcfa to a
on Nwember 14,1990. perennial problem which both the Reseme Bank
and the commercial banks have been
with a view to widening the call and notice
mcmey market and to bringing about a greater
integration of various segments of the money
market, all the participants in the bills
rediscounting market have been granted enay into
the money market, as lenders, effective October
20, 1990. The money market interest rates have
been extremely volatile in the recent period with
rates rising to phenomenal levels during certain
periods and this has created some distortion in the
financial system. The Reserve Bank has taken
measuns to reduce these distortion by modulating
its refinance policies and this has had a salutary
effect.
For reducing the compleiity of the interest
rate regulatory system, a measure which has been
overdue and which has now been effected from
September 22, 1990 relates to the rationalisation
of the larding rate structure of scheduled
commercial banks. The structure of lending rates,
as it had evolved over time, had been
characterised by an excessive proliferation of
rates. Thre were not only a number of rate
pesaiptions for each activity but also bonowers
ware charged vastly different rates for the same
loan amount. Loan rates depended on the size, the
purpose, the duration, the geographical location
and the sactor of fwing. With a view to
ratimalising the sbucaue, new lending rates of
scheduled camnaci J banks linking interest rates
to the size of the loan have been prescribed and
this has signiricantly reduced the existing
multiplicity and complexity of lending rates.
'Lfndef the new hdiq rate eaucture linking
ir~mw2 rotbs to the size of the loan (except for
DRI adwurces md exprnt crcdit), the rates ran;.e
froan 10.0 per cent to 16.0 per cent (minimum).
All bans rrbove Rs.2 lakhs, imspective of the
pupoet, uould bve a minimum interest rak of
16pacsat(txaprfau~aresdjusmaentsfortum
loan8 D csltria nclcct wc&ors viz agriculture, experiencing. This relates to the question of large
unutilised credit limits. This phemanswa has
tended to create cansttaints in enfandug c~rdit
discipline and implementing macrocredit policy
goals. With a view to bringing about grea&r
discipline in the availment of baak finance by
borrowers and facilitating better funds
management, it was decided to levy a minimum
commitment charge of 1 pet cent per mum on
the unutilised portion of the working capital limits,
effective from January 1, 1991, in the case of all
borrowers with working capital limits of Rs. one
crore and over. With a view to prwiding a
reasonable degree of flexibility to borrowers, a
tolerance level of 15 per cent of the quarterly
operating limit has been provided for and the
charge would be imposed only if the unutilised
portion is in excess of the tolerance level. With
a view to encouraging the bill culture, it was
indicated that, effective April 1, 1988, &be credit
limits sanctioned by a bank to partits against book
debts should not be more than 75 par ant of the
aggregate limits sanctioned to such bonow6rs for
financing inland credit sales. Sufficieat time has
already elapsed since the setting up of this
stipulation. In the case of' fund-bared working
capital limits of Rs. 5 um lrnd om, nffcc~ve
January 1, 1991, intwest at -2 paceatrgc points
above the relevant cash credit interest rate would
be levied on that pordan of the book- f-
which will be in excess of the prescribed norms
of 75 per cent of limits sanctioned to the
borrowers for ftnsncing iulqd aadit sales. With
the remission of stamp duty on wance bills routed
through banks, a major hurdle in the way of wing
bills in genuine commacia1 md trade tramactions
has now been sliminatad. The numbs of fintocia1
institutions pcfinittd to oparte in tbe bill8
rediscowt muirst hn# bwa dnrged. It is how
that the luge busbm a~01u in tbe private
as well as public lector would rccop the bill
discipline with a vicw to improvias tbe paymmts
system. &&wry 1991 RBSBRVE BANK OF INDIA BW 179
A pnrceos of Wdisuion ah inv01m a trade ~ssociations should emwe tfiu their
proceag ob self-mgulation, and industry and track constituentJ do not violate basic wadit norms.
mpet ensure thrt there is no misutilhticla (d aedit Drawal on cheapcrawes of credit with a view
facilities. In this context, they must eschrw to lending in the money market is clearly not
drawing more credit than their legitimate needs permissible.
md in jwrticular I must urge that induw and