November I993 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
SPEECH
INTERACTION OF DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY POLICY IN THE CONTEXT OF THE FINANCIAL
SECTOR REFORMS'
S. S. Tarapore*
I am grateful to the National Institute of Bank somewhat more open economy the transmission
Management for giving me the opportunity to process from the domestic sector to the external
participale in the National Seminar on Trade and sector and vice versa is progressively suonger and
Financial Sector Reform. When the definitive faster and if internal and external stability are
mopetary history of our life time is written up, prime objectives it is necessary to have rnorc
the pcriod 1991-93 will be acknowledged as a sensitive signals which would enable timely policy
watershed as this has perhaps ban the first time corrections.
that domestic and international monetary policy
action has been undertaken in a consistent and 4, While reviewing the role of domestic cohesive manner in conjunction with other arms monetary policy it is necessary to take a hard look of overall economic policy. In llus at certain facu. An increasing number of cenwal propose to outline some of the key issues which banks the world over are recognising the virtue need to be considered in the pursuit of an effective of making price as the principal domestic and internarional monetary policy. What often militates against this objective is he
2. It would perhaps be only fair to admit that
until recently there were too many rigidities in the
system. While control of inflation has always been
an avowed objective of policy, interest rate
rigidities, exchange rate rigidities, large
monetisation of the Government deficit and a
banking system greatly weakened by multiplicity
of objectives rendered impossible the meaningful
execution of monetary policy. While there has
been greater effectiveness of policy execution in
the recent period this is not to say that policy
conflicts and policy attenuation in certain areas
do not remain. Nonetheless, there has been a vast
improvemefit in overall monetary policy
effectiveness as a consequence of the reform
process. irresistible urge to create money under the
erroneous belief that such created money can
contribute to growth of the economy.. Only a
successful track record of low inflation over a
long period of time would give credibility to
monetary policy action; this is the most prized yet
most difficult ingredient of monetary policy.
There is a need for an institutional commitment
to price stability as the major objecdve of
monetary policy and to achieve this there has to
be an intellectual conviction lhat long-run
economic growth is determined by real factors and
not by the expansion of money. It is only when
these parameters are clearly understood that there
is a possibility of achieving a lasting reduction in
Lhe inflation rale. Lest this be misconstrued as a
view point that monetary policy can miraculously
tackle inflation let me hasten to strcss that no 3. As the economy moves progressively from a mOneury policy cu, on iu own nduce innuion relatively closed or insulated economy to a wieout a somd snli-innationav policy.
+ Th~s is a special address delivered by Dtputy Governor, choice before the fist is sometimes as a
Shri S. S. Tanpam, u the National Seminu on Th and between taxation, borrowing or Financial Sector Reforms organised by the
N~~~~~ lnSkililuu of B~~ M~~~~~~~ on money; this is erroneous as an uncovered deficit
octobu 19, 1993. also carries a price which may be higher than
* 1 m indebted to SM Michael Pa for hi8 invaluable taxation Or borrowing from the market. TO the
help in prapuing this rddmrs. extent that other imp~rtiint agents in the ecoMwny RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN November 1993
are not totally conlmitted to Inflation control the
burden on the central bank is to that extent greater.
4. While stressing the inexorable link between
creation of money and inflation, i. e. inflation can
take place only if it is financed. it is not to
repudiate that unanticipated changes in monetary
policy can affect output in the very short-run.
Institutional developments and changes in velocity
do give rise to an esoteric debate on the
breakdown of the relationship between money,
output and prices but this is largely an intellectual
debate. The hard ground realities are that a
country that persistently creates excessive money
is inevitably afflicted by a high rate of inflation.
It is precisely to avoid such problems that some
countries have moved over to prescribing a
specific target on inflation as also to provide for
transparency in the decision taking in pursuit of
such targets.
5. The opening up of the Indian economy
requires greater atrention lo what is happening on
the inflation front in oOier countries. While the
Indian inflation rate has come down in the recent
period, and this is indeed a commendable
achievement, we cannot rest on our laurels. Indian
inflation rates have fallen from 10-11 per cent
(average for 1992-93) to a little over 7 per cent
in the recent period; however, what is pertinent
is that inflation rates in countries with a history
of high inflation have fallen even more sharply
e. g. U.K., France, Korea, Sweden, Norway,
Australia and New Zcaland.
6. The integration of global financial markets
has been much faster than the integration of the
goods market. As investors are able to switch
between different types of assets and also
progressively have greater freedom as bctwcen
currencies, investor sensitivities became vital for
the international implications of monetary policy.
Thus, global investors have the potential to induce
large capital flows when they perceive changes
in fundamentals and when they perceive
uncertainties particularly in relation to monetary
policy. For a country which is just opening up to
the rest of the international economy, pressures
in the form of potential instability from the external sector could well tempt the country to re-
regulate and thereby avoid uncertainties. But this
would be precisely the wrong policy response.
Central banks which face an increasingly open
economy have to redouble their efforts in
designing sound policies and persevere with them.
So long as the fundamentals are sound a country
need not fear any adverse impact from the
integration of financial markets. Since the speed
of response of market participants would
accelerate, policy responses of the authorities have
to be faster than hitherto and in this context it
is essential that there should be disciplined
monetary and fiscal policies with the growing
integration of markets, internationally mobile
resources inevitably have effects on domestic
policies. If a country retains inappropriately low
interest rates, relative to its fundamentals, there
would be inevitable pressures on the exchange
rate and increased inflationary pressures. It is in
this context that domestic monetary policy and
exchange .rate policy have to be mutually
consistent.
7. Participants would be familiar with thc
changes in domestic monetary policy in the past
two years and as such I would not want to dwell
on these changes. The central theme of the policy
has been to move away from direct controls to
indirect controls and to reduce the minutiae of
regulation while strengthening prudential norms.
There has been a significant reduction in reserve
requirements and it is expected that the effective
SLR would be around 33 per cent by the end of
March 1994 (taking into account the lower SLR
on certain non-resident deposits as also the nil
SLR on certain external liabilities) and as such
the adjustment is on track with the medium-term
programme of attaining a 25 per cent SLR over
a three year period. The reduction in the CRR has
also been undertaken, albeit a littie slowly in view
of the large primary money overhang. The
innovations in the instruments of internal debt
management policy have been substantial - the
move towards market - related rates of interest
on Government paper and the auctions for datcd
sccurilics, 91 Day and 364 Day Treasury Bills,
and Repos. Steps are also being taken to develop
the institutional framework for the secondary November 1993 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLJTIIN
market in Government securities. In the area of
interest rates there has been substantial
rationalisation of lending and deposit rates and the
number of prescriptions are now minimal and the
groundwork has been laid for the ultimate
deregulation of interest rates by the Reserve Bank.
The Reserve Bank could well develop a system
of a reference rate. A convention could develop
whereby banks take cognisance of this reference
rate and fix their dcposit and lending rates at
appropriate differentials below and above the
reference rate.
8. One of the weak links in the operation of
monetary policy has been the automatic
monetisation of the budget deficit through the
creation of ad hoe Treasury Bills. In the Annual
Report of the Reserve Bank of India for 1992-
93 it ha! been suggested that the proportion of
auction bills in the total creation of 91 Day
Treasury Bills should be raised in a phased
manner so that by 1996-97 the system of ad hoe
Treasury Bills is totally discontinued. The Reserve
Bank as part of its open market operations can
thcn decide on the extent of Government paper
it wants to hold. The cessation of automatic
monetisation of the budget deficit would restore
monetary policy to its intended vital role in the
regulation of money and credit. It is pertinent to
notc that in 1993-94 the important first phase of
the reduction in automatic monetisation has
already been introduced. While as of October 8,
1993, the increase in net RBI credit to the Centre
was Rs. 13,297 crore, the net absorption by the
market of 91 days auctioned Treasury Bills was
Rs. 5,247 crore.
b
9. As mentioned earlier, with the opening up of
the external sector, the transmission of impulses
from the domestic to the external sector and vice
versa would be more powerful and in this conlext
the domestic monetary policy and the policies
relating to the external sector need to be more
closely integrated. In this context, it is useful to
review the impact of changes in exchange rate
policy and other policies which impinge on the
external sector.
10. In the period since July 1991 then have been certain vital policy changes in the exchange rate
regime. Central to these policy responses was the
perception of the integral link between domestic
monetary policy and exchange rate policy. The
adjustment in the exchange rate in July 1991
corrected an overvalued rupee and it was perhaps
the one single important measure which facilitated
the subsequent liberalisation of the trade and
payments regime. The dual exchange rate system
which came into existence in March 1992 was,
once again, a transitional arrangement, adopled
primarily to prevent the rescrves from being
depleted by persistent excess demand in the
foreign exchange market. It also insulated
'essential' imports from exchange rate
fluctuations. The unification of exchange rates on
March 1, 1993 was in many ways a logical
culmination of various policy responses since
July 1991.
1 1. The operation of the inter-bank market under
the unified exchange rate has been encouraging.
These early experiences have to be carefully sifted
even as efforts go into crafting the policy
framework for an appropriate exchange rate
regime. A concatenation of events have
favourably affected the working of the exchange
rate regime since the unification of exchange rates
in March. The depreciation which would result
from the unification had been erroneously
discounted by the market by a much larger
proportion than eventuated and as such in the
immediate post-unification period, the rupee
gained strength in the inter - bank market. Given
the interest rate structurcs in major currency
centres and the prevailing interest rates in India,
and the prospects of s steady exchange value of
the rupee, there was an upsurge of funds flowing
into the Indian foreign exchange market.
12. The range of market rates have converged
around the RBI buying rate which remained finn
supported, as it were, by passive intervention
purchases by RBI of US $ 4544 million upto Ihe
end of September 1993. The strength of the rupee
is quite clearly more than transitory. The foreign
currency assets of the Reserve Bank upto the end
of September 1993 rose to US $ 7.6 billion from
US $ 6.4 billion at the end of March 1993 i. e. 1370 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN November 1993
an increase of US $ 1.2 billion. There has,
however, been a qualitative improvement in the
reserves as in the same period the swaps came
down from US $ 1,243 million to US $ 2 million
and Foreign Currency (Banks and Others)
Deposits (FCBOD) from US $ 1,039 million to
US $ 851 million. Furthermore, the State Bank
of India's (SBI) short-term liabilities on account
of Public Sector Units (PSU) came down from US
$ 1,030 million to US $ 168 million. In the recent
period there has been some restructuring of the
Foreign Currency Non Resident Accounts
(FCNRA) scheme (under which the RBI provides
exchange guarantees) and deposits of less than 2
years are no longer permitted under this scheme.
While there was a net outflow of US $ 667 million
under the FCNRA scheme between the end of
March and the end of September 1993. this was
more than compensated for by inflows under the
two new schemes viz., Foreign Currency Non
Resident (Banks) (FCNR (B)) scheme and Non
Resident (Non Repatriable) Rupee Deposit (NR
(NR)RD) scheme. As such, the rcslructuring of
the FCNRA scheme is being achieved without a
net outflow under all the non-resident deposit
schemes taken together and without curtailing the
facilities lo non-resident depositors. As a result,
the reserves have shown a distinct qualitative
strengthening with a large reduction in short-term
liabilities.
13. During the Liberalised Exchange Rate
Management System (LERMS) period the inter-
bat* swap premia ruled consistently above the
RBI premia upto November 1992. This period dlso
coincided with the prevalence of high interest
rates in the call money market. Between
November 1992 and March 1993 however, the
inter-bank premia were in better alignment with
the RBI premia. With the unification of exchange
rates, the inter-bank premia declined especially in
July and August 1993. Since September 1993,
however, there has been some rise in the inter-
bank swap rates but these rates are still less than
3.50 per cent per annum for a three month swap.
This points to the relative strengthening of the
rupee.
14.The experience with unification of exchange
rates in India and the strengthening of the foreign exchange reserves has also been the case in other
countries undertaking such reforms. The fact that
Indian interest rates were substantially higher than
in key currency markets while the inflation rate
remained moderate in India resulted in foreign
exchange inflows in response to favourable real
interest rate differentials and the low cost of
exchange risk cover in the context of stability of
the rupee.
15. The future stability of the exchange rate
depends crucially upon the degree of success that
is achieved in holding down inflationary pressures
and the continuing of an interest rate structure
which provides for appropriate differentials as
between rupee interest rates and interest rates in
key currencies. If there is excessive monetary
expansion it can spark off a spurt in import
demand and a loss in competitiveness as exports
become costlier. As such rising prices and
exchange rate pressures could follow each other
in a mutually reinforcing spiral. Holding down
inflation is of course, easier said than done. The
large increase in net RBI credit to government and
the build up of foreign exchange reserves in the
first half of the year has resulted in a substantial
injection of primary liquidity in the economy.
While emphasising the need for fiscal restraint and
the control of domestic liquidity, it is necessary
to recognise that opening up of the external sector
accelerates the transmission process and domestic
monetary policy can no longer operate in an
insulated environment.
16. Macro economic policy, and in particular,
monetary policy has to be designed to reconcile
the objectives of price stability and exchange rate
stability. The structure of the exchange rate
regime has major imp!ications for monetary
policy. The exchange rate system would need to
subserve the monetary stance and to pursue the
objectives set by the latter, the principal one being
the control of inflation. A stable exchange rate
provides an anchor for the price level. Under these
circumstances, the balance of payments would be
determined by domestic economic activity and the
exchange rate will have an equilibrating role. As
such, in a deregulated environment there is an
inextricable link between monetary policy and
exchange rate policy.
V November 1993 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN 1371
17. The basic premise of a floating exchange rate
system is that the exchange rate will settle at
levels consistent with economic fundamentals. A
floating rate will then achieve adjustments in the
balance of payments through price signals
impinging upon demand and reflect in higher
inflation to the extent that the real sectors do not
respond rapidly to these signals. 18. While the Indian exchange rate system avoids
very short-term day-to-day volatility there is no
attempt to stand in the way of fundamental
changes. As such, it would only be reasonable to
expect that in future the two way signals between
the domestic and external sectors would be
stronger than hitherto and it is in this context that
domestic and international monetary policy will
be increasingly intertwined.