April 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
DEVELOPING THE MONEY AND SECURITIES MARKETS IN
INDIA+
C. Rangarajan*
Overview
lndia launched a programme of stabilisation
and structural rcfornls in 1991-92' . The main
objective is to improve the productivity and ef-
ficiency of the entire economic system and im-
par1 greater a,mpetitive and structural flexibility.
Keforrn of the financial sector (encompassing,
inter alia, the development of money and
securities market) constitutes a critical con]-
ponent of India's program towards economic
liberalisation.
2. lndia has long been characterised by a
dense network of financial institutions. Since in-
dependence in 1947 an active promotional role
has been played by the public sector, led by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in setting up finan-
cial institutions. Today, in addition to the RBI,
thc banking network includes commercial and
coopcralivc banks, and national and State level
development banks. Non-banking financial in-
stitutions include insurance companies, unit
trusts and mutual funds, finance companies and
stock exchanges.
3. Thc comn~ercial banking systcm has been
progressively nationalised over the years, starting
with the creation of the State Bank of India in
1955, and the subsequent nationalisat~on of four-
teen major domestic private banks in 1969. (A
further six banks were nationalised in 1980).
Foreign hanks, many of whom have paled in
India Srom colonial times, were not nationaljsd,
although there were restrictions on branch
growth, and on enlry of new foreign banks.
These restrictions have been rece~~tly eased, and
+ This paper was presented at the Sixth Seminar on Central
Bulking. at the Intornational Monetary Fund, Washington
L).C on March 9. 1994.
* The autlri~r gratdully aclulowledges the help of Suman
Bery, K. Kmagasabapathy and Udaihir S. Das in the writing
of this paper.
I The Indian fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31. foreign banks today account for approximately
8% of bank deposits. Life insurance was
nationalised in 1956 and general insurance in
1972.
4. Particularly since 1969 there has been a
massive expansion in the scalc and gographic
coverage of the banking systcm. These trends are
reflected in various aggregate measures. The
finance ratio (measured as the ratio of total finan-
cial flows to national income) has risen liom 17
per cent of GDP in 1965-66 to 43 per cent in
1991-92. The intermediation ratio (the ratio of
secondary issues to prin~ary issues) has risen
from 0.46 to 0.75 over the same period. Equally,
the M3 to GDP ratio ha$ increased from 25 per
cent In 1970-7 1 to ahout 50 per cent in 1992-93.
5. Though extensive, the financial systcm has
functioned in an environment of finandal repres-
sion, driven primarily by fiscal compulsions. The
financial system (especially the banks) were
directed to provide significant credit support for
government expenditure (both current and capi-
tal) as also to such prcfcrral economic sectors
as small-scale industry, agricullure and the
wcaker sections of society. Interest rates, though
generally positive in real terms for dep(~sitors,
were tightly controlled and tughly differentiated,
incorporating significant elements of cross-sub-
sidy. Concurrently, financial institutions have
faced numerous statutory portfolio restrictions.
The overall result has been to make the financial
intermediaries (particularly those under public
ownership) uncompetitivc.
6. Monetary and internal debt managemenl
policy in India, particularly since the late 19fiOs,
was similarly undermined by excessive
monetisation of the Central government's fiscal
deficit by the Central Bank. As a result money
and government securities markets lost thcir earlier
vibrancy, and ceased to provide the basis for the 482 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN April 1994
indirect conduct of monetary policy. The Bank
rare (the rediscount rate) and open market opera-
tions lost their effectiveness as policy tools. In-
stead, cash reserve requirements, administered
interest rates and credit controls became the
dominant instruments. There was no level play-
ing field for market agents, the regulatory system
enforced the segmentation of markets and a non-
transparent system inhibited compcti ti ve pricing
of assets. Exchange controls cnsured considcr-
able segmenlation between domestic and foreign
asset markets.
7. To make the Indian financial system more
efticient and viable is the major focus of India's
programme of structural reform in the tinancial
sector, consistent with the thrust of reforms in
other arcas. The problems now facing us are
those 01' (he phasing and sequencing of reform
nleasures. As a relative late-conicr, India is able
to benetit from the experience of Latin American
and Asian economies which had liberdised car-
lier. Accordingly, I will dcvotc thc bulk of my
talk to the issues and problems of managing the
transition to freer financial markets in India.
focusing on the development of money and
government securities markets, interest rate
deregulation and movement towards indirect
tools of monetary policy.
The Pre-reform Context
Fiscal and Monetary Management
8. In the two decadcs after its founding in
1935. there was no siglliticant increase in thc
Reserve Bank's holdings of internal government
debt. A disZjnct shift occurred in the late sixties
when stronger central control over credit alloca-
tion was imposed, seeking to achieve grcater
congruence betwccn crcdit flows and the pattern
of pduction in the five-year plans. These trends
received further impetus after bank nationalisa-
tion in 1969.
9. The period, from the early 1970s was also
charactaised by weakening of fiscal discipline
leading to a large expansion in the Central government's domestic and foreign borrowing
requirements. The ratio of the gross fiscal deficit
to GDP increased from 3.5 per cent in 1970-71
to 8.4 per cent in 1990-91. Through obligatory
cash reserve requirements (held at the Central
hank) and a statutory liquidity ratio (to be met
through holdings of government and other ap-
proved securities), the resources of banks came
to be incorporated into the fiscal allocation
process, with less emphasis on bank profitability.
With a view to keeping government borrowing
costs down, the yields on both Trcasury bills and
longer-term paper were kept artificially low. This
limited the demand for government paper to the
captive market of the banks (and other term
financial intermediaries. such as insurance com-
panies and provident funds). Rcsidual financing
needs of government therchy devolved upon the
RBI.
10. Until the overall reform process was in-
itiated in 1991. the basic goal of' monetary policy
was to try and neutralisc the impact of the fiscal
deficits. Simplifying somewhat, with a given tis-
cal deficit the banking systcm would absorb a
sir~ablc par1 of the tinancing requirement at low
interest rates under the statutory liquidity ratio
(SLR), while the Reserve Bank picked up any
uncovered portion through the mechanism of cui
hoc Treasury Bills, which were nor marketable,
and were no more than a hook-keeping entry is-
sued on demand instantly to mcct thc
Government's requirements. Monetary manage-
ment took the fom~ of compensatory increases
in the cash reserve ratio (CRR) for banks, con-
trols on growth of commercial credit (mainly to
the enterprise sector) and of adjusting ad-
minislered interest rates.
I I. Such a mix of policies had deleterious
long-term effects as large fiscal deficits became
chronic and continuous escalation of the two
ratios became necessary. In the early 1970s the
cash reserve ratio for banks was as low as 3 per-
cent and the statutory liquidity ratio was 25 per
cent. By 1991-92 the ratios on incremental
deposits were 25 per cent for the CRR and 38.5
per cent for the SLR. At the sarne'time the RBI's April 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN 483
holdings of Central government debt (i.e. its
monetisation of the government deficit) bal-
looned. By 199 1 it was clear that the trajectory
of growth in government debt was becoming un-
sustainable, and that a significant improvement
in the primary deficit was needed.
12. In the presence of ad hoc- issue of
Treasury bills, and in the absence of market-
determined interest ratcs, open market operations
were not available as a monctary instrument. Thc
salcs and purchases of govcrnlicnt securities by
Reserve Bank of' India were therefore used only
for grooming the market and ensuring a success-
ful borrowing pn)gramme for tllc government.
Whlic the Reservc Bank did not buy securities
for cash, it did however, conduct "switch opera-
tions" in Central government securities, with a
view to enabling thc banks and institutions to
switch over Srolll low-yielding to high-yielding
securities and to adjust portfolio maturities.
The Money Market
13. Thc Indian treasury hill market was rela-
tively frec upto the early 1060s. Its development
lhcrcaftcr was retarded by the trends in deficit
finance clcscribcd above. The hulk of the treasury
hill issue was of nd /roc- 9 I -day treasury bills,
lirsl instituted in the 1950s2. The markcted 91-
(fay bill (whch continued to be issued) also suf-
tcrcd a decline. While Uis had earlier been sold
through weekly tenders at market rates, after
1965 ths was placed on tap at a low, fixed dis-
count rate, its 11lain selling pnt being that it was
freely rcdiscountable by the Central bank. Until
1974. the discount was periodically adjusted to
changes in the Bank rate, but thcrcafter th~s link
was seOered, and the discount rate remained at
a fixed level of 4.6%).
14. Dealings in the money markct were con-
fined to a few instruments like overnight call
money and notice money (14 days). Rates of in-
terest on such instruments also came to bc tightly
controlled with ceilings prescribed on all rates.
2 See Rangarajan C (1993). "Autonomy of Central Banb".
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin. December 1993. The only money market instrument that operated
relatively freely outside the regulatory
framework was the inter-corporate deposit, with
the administered lending rate of hanks providing
a market tloor to the instrument.
Government Securities Market
15. Apart from treasury bills, Government
securities in a broad sense include term securities
of different maturities issued by Central and
State governments and institutions guaranteed by
these entities, primarily in such infrastructure
sectors as power and transport. In India, thcse
securities are referred to as 'dated' securities.
They have an initial maturity in excess ot' one
3 year, and interest is usually payable by coupon- .
The six, maturity and coupon rates of these is-
sues have throughout been managed by the
Reserve Bank of India.
16. The Government securities market had a
wide base in the pre- independence period, with
active secondary trading. With the expansion in
the borrowing programme for the five-year plans
in the 1950s and 1960s, banks, insurance com-
panics and provident finds were statutorily re-
quired to invest in these securities. The average
maturity of securities remained fairly long --
above 20 years -- rcflecting morc the preferences
of the issuers than those of the investors. The
combination of a tightly-controlled interest rate
structure and statutory requirements to hold these
securities, robbed the secondary market of any
vibrancy.
Markets in Transition
Reform Measures 1985-91
17. Even within the framework of ad-
ministered interest rates, attempts were made
during the second half of the 1980s to inlpart
some tlexibility to thc money and government
securities markets. These steps were hased on the
recommendations of the Committee to Review
the Working of the Monetary System (the "Chak-
3 As ~~otcd helow. a zero-coupon insbrument has recently
been introduced. 484 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETlN April 1994
ravarty Committee", 1985) and thc Working
Group on the Money Market (the "Vaghul Com-
mittee", 1987). Several important measures
were taken in this period.
(i) With a view to encouraging secondary
market activity, the maximuni coupon rate
which had heen as low as 6.5 per cent in
1.977-78 was raised in stages to 11.5 per
cent in 1985-86. Concurrently, the maxi-
mum maturity was reduced from 30 ycars
to 20 years.
(ii) Most of thc rates in the money market
(those for call money, notice money, inter-
hank deposits and hills rediscounting)
wcre freed in 1989.
(iii) Non-hank institutions wcre permitted to
participate in the money market. although
only as lenders.
(iv) A number of instrunlcnts were developed
to provide breadth and dcpth to the money
market. A 182 - day treasury hill placed
by auction, not rediscountable with the
Central hank, was introduced in 1986.
Certificates of Deposit (CDs), Commercial
Paper (CPs) and Inter-hank Participations
(PCs), all cntereci the scene at the initiative
of the Rcscrvc Bank which frarncd
guidelines for issuance of these instru-
ments, suhjcct to ccrtain portfolio ceilings.
(v) A Discount and Finance House of India
(DFHI) was set up in 1988 as a Rescrvc
Bank subsidiary with participation from
othcr moncy market institutions to
facilitate smoothcning of short-term li-
quidity imbalances ant1 to impart greater
tlexibility to the money market.
(vi) As discussed more fully later, the term
structure of interest rates was rationalised,
reducing the number of adnlinis?ercd rates
as also realigning short-term and long-
term rates in the system. Reform Measures: post - 1991
18. In the first half of 1991 the econaply suf-
fered an acute balance of payments and inflation
crisis. A comprehensive package of stabilisation
and structural reform measures *was initiated in
mid- 199 1. In the financial sector, the recommen-
dations of the Committee on the Financial Sys-
tem (the "Narasimham Committee", November
I99 1) provided the basis for certain fresh initia-
ti vcs.
19. As already noted, part of thb stahilisation
package involved raising the comined in-
cremental preemption of resources through the
SLR and CRR to an unprecedented and unsus-
tainahlc level of 63.5% of demand and time
liabilities. While these measures succeeded in
curhing inflation, it was recognised that the time
had come to totally reorient the tools of n~onetary
policy, from dircct controls to indirect intervcn-
tions. II was clearly recogniscd that such a
change would he facilitated if government's
financing needs were moderated, allowing
govcrnnlent to pay market interest rates on its
fresh debt. Additionally, greatcr integration of
the various components of the money and capital
markets would he needed. A sharp adjustment in
the tiscal dcficit was made in financial year
1991-92, from 8.4 per cent of GDP to 6.0 pcr
cent. Thcrcatter the incremental CRR plus SLR
was reduced to 45 per cent, and then further to
39 per cent. Concurrent with these moves. major
reforms werc introduced in the Government
securities instruments and markets, discussed
below.
Treasury bills
20. A 364-day treasury bill on an auction
basis was introduced in April 1992; this replaced
the previous 182-day bill, and as with its
predecessor, is not purchased or rediscounted by
the RBI. This instrument found ready acceptance
in the market, and by January 1994 had absorbed
Rs. 150 billion (approximately $ 5 billion at cur-
rent exchange rates). 'The discount has varied be-
tween 10.9 and 1 1.4 per cent, reflecting liquidity April 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
conditions and market perceptions of yield curve
evolution. By way of comparison, the annualiscd
inflation rate during 1993 has ruled at about 8
per cent.
21. A 91-day auction treasury hill was intro-
duced in January 1993 (in addition to the pre-
existing tap bill), and has also won acceptance
in the market. Around 30 per cent ot' the ag-
gregate increasc in 9 I-day Treasury bills over thc
past year has been in the form of thc auctioned
bills (the remaining 70 per cent being represented
by ad hoc bills and tap bills cligible for redis-
count). The auctioned hills are absorbed almost
entirely by the market; the rates emerging
through competitive bids have hecome money
market reference rates. Since its introduction, the
discount on thc auctioned 91-day Treasury Bill
has varied in the range of 7.9 per cent lo 10.3
per ccnt. Two financial institutions have reccntly
introduced floating rate contracts linked to
Treasury Bill rates.
22. Till 1992, accun~ulaterl RBI holdings of
(id hoc treasury bills used lo be funded into spc-
cia1 securities, without any maturity and market
significance. As against this passive operation,
funding of 364-day Treasury Bills and 91-day
auction Treasury Bills was effected in 1993-94.
converting them into daled securities of tlw and
two year maturity respectively, at rates attractive
to the market. These funded securities now fom~
the basis of an active secondary market.
Government Dated Secudtks
f 23. In the casc of government dated securities,
coupon rates were raised and maturities shor-
tened to bring these securities closer to market
terms. In 1991, the ceiling on interest rate on the
Government securities was 11.5 per cent whle
the minimum lending rate of banks for large ad-
vances was as high as 20.0 per cent. There was,
thus, a need to bring these rates into better align-
mcnt.The coupon rate for a 10-year maturity was
raised by as much as 2.75 per cent between 1991 and 1093. The maximum maturity has been
reduced from 20 years to 10 years. Ttday the
ceiling on the Government securities interest rate
is 13.3 per ccnt while the minimum lending rate
of banks is IS per cent. Thus has been a major
correction of the earlier interest ratc disparities.
24. Since April 1992 the entire Central
government borrowing programme in daled
securities has been conductetl through auctions.
This has been a major advance and has evoked
several l'avourable market responses:
It has fostered an elastic band of interest
responsiveness from investors for a range of
maturities up to 10 ycars. This is an important
step in the process of "price discovery".
Second, and related lo the first, despite,
relaxations in statutory requiremetlts for institu-
tions to hold government securities, the market
has absorbed all primary issues. without any
significant devolvemcnt on Ule Central bank.
A new treasury culture has developed among
hanks and institutions. In an environment where
inexperienced investors exisl side by side with
sophisticated institutions, the auction system
within an acindtustered framework has enabled
development of bidding skills among all tnarket
agents.
The yield curve has become more flexible. A
zero-coupon bond of the Central Government, of
5-year maturity issued in January 1994 received
an overwhelming response, shifting the yield
curve significantly downward.
Non-captive investors like financial institu-
tions and private corporate sector arc now show-
ing much greater keenness in acquiring govern-
ment securities. Indeed, the accusation some-
times now made is that yields on Govenunent
securities are too attractive, and are responsible
for keeping up the entire level of interest rates.
In short, this expcricnce provides an example of
how market grooming combined with yield cwve 486 RESERVE BM OF INDIA BULLETIN April 1994
flexibility can take place even within an ad-
ministered structure.
Repurchase Agreements
25. Another precursor to active open market
operations has been the developmenl of the in-
strument of repurchase agreements (repos) be-
tween the RBI and the commercial banks. The
first auction of such repos took place in Decem-
ber 1992, collateralised by Central govcrnment
dated securities, rather than Treasury Bills,
which arc the more usual collateral in more
developed markets. This choice of collateral was
mainly detcrrnined by availability of marketable
stock in the inventory of the RBI. The period of
the rep) has varied between overnight (at the
beginning, when the instrument was first intro-
duced) to 14 days currently, which is the length
of the reserves make-up period. The objective of
the rcpo is to even out liquidity within the reser-
ves make-up fortnight and to rcduce the volatility
in the call moncy market. So far, the RBI has
only used repos to drain reservcs from the banks,
(i.e. to 'sell' from its holdings in exchange for
cash) and not to supply reserves. Following the
introduction of the rep) instrument, the volatility
in call money ratcs has been significantly
reduced. The rcps have also helpcd in lowering
Reserve Bank credit to Ccntral government and
reserve money expansion.
26. With a view to initiating active debt
management operations, all functions pertaining
to internal deht management by Rcscrve Bank
of India have been entrusted to an inter-discipli-
nary unit called the Internal Debt Management
Cell created in October 1992. me objectives are
to evolve appropriate policies relating to internal
deht management as a part of the overall
monetary policy and, in pursuancc of this, b
manage internal debt operations such as market
borrowing and open market operations and to
promote an active and efficient government
securities market. Open Market Operations
27. Since April 1992, a new approach has
been followed by Reserve Bank in its sale/pur-
chase operations in government securities. The
switch operations were discontinued as they did
no1 have any effect on the monetary aggregates.
In setting its price list, the Reserve Bank now
responds to market yields more quickly, using
bidding patterns at its auctions as a guide. Also,
in contrast to past practice, RBI is now prepared
to purchaqe ccrtain securities for cash. Depend-
ing upon the term preferences of the market and
coupon rates, selective offers are made to the
market at competitive prices. This has provided
an instrument of yield curve management even
in the absence of a primary dealer network.
Ofher Measures
28. A number of other measures have becn
taken since 1991 to Impart greater flexibility to
money and governtnent securities markets.
Banks, bank subsidiaries and financial institu-
tions have becn allowcd to set up money market
mutual funds, though the response so far is
lukewarm in the abscnce of an active secondary
market for money market instruments. As a
measure of deregulation, sclected financial in-
stitutions, previously permitted only to lend to
the call money market, have now been permitted
to borrow from the short-term inter-bank money
market for maturities between three and six
months. Restrictions on issue of commercial
paper (by blue chip corporations) and certificates
of deposit (by banks) have been significantly
relaxed. Serious irregularities in government
securities transactions had cropped up in early
1992, following which several regulatory
guidclines were issued streamlining secondary
market transactions in government secwi ties. All
these steps have been designed to accustom
market agents to greater choice and risk in the
management of their portfolios, and to provide
clear signals as to the future evolution of the sys-
tem. April 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
Future Evolution
29. Our medium-term goals are clear: market-
determined, interest rates with some concessional
rates, greater integration of the Indian financial
system with international flows and reliance on
indirect methods of monetary control (i.e. policy
induced adjus tnlents in the Central hank halance
sheet) as the main mechanism of monetary
policy. While the steps taken so far have suc-
ceeded in restoring some vibrancy to the money
and Government securities markets, there are
several important measures to he undertaken
before the markets can be considered free.
30. The experience of Latin American and
Asian economies provides some guidance on the
appropriate preconditions and sequencing for
successful financial reforms. The most important
of these are 'sound public finances, a well-
capitalised banking system, and effective pruden-
tial regulations and monitoring. All Ulree areas
arc being addressed as part of our rcforrn
programme.
FL.rcal Adjustment
31. Sustained fiscal adjustment must underpin
further reforms. In [he absence of creciihle fiscal
control and price stability, there is some risk that
interest rate deregulation could result in over-
shooting and disrupt thc reform process. Thc
Government of India has committed itself to con-
tinued reduction in gross fiscal deficit from the
level of 5.796 reached in 1992-93. Trcnds during
the financial year 1993-94 have heen somewhat
worrying, with the (seasonally unadjusted)
deficit in the first half of the year running at an
annual ;ate roughly triple the targeted year-end
level. This reflects revenue shortfalls partly re-
laM to sluggish industrial activity, and delay in
sale of equity in public enterprises. There has
been agreement betkeen the Reserve Bank and
government that ds incremental deficit should
not be rnonetised. Accordingly, government has
resorted to additional borrowing through treasury
bills and m-coupon bonds at market- related
rates. Fortunately this unplanned Increase in the borrowing requirement has occmed at a time
when the domestic market is flush with funds,
but this is a short-term phenomenon that cannot
be relied on. Nonetheless, the use of these market
instruments has meant that the monetised deficit
can be kept under control.
Strengthening the Banking System
32. Interest rate deregulation is also risky if
the balance- sheets of financial intermediaries,
particularly commercial hanks are weak, for the
wcll-known reasons of adverse selection, high
intermediation costs and illiquidity. A clean-up
of halance sheets and restoration of profitability
of the public-sector banks has been at the core
of our financial sector reform programme. The
process started with the introduction of new
norms for asset classification and income recog-
nition to be applied by the banks to their balance
sheets for 1992-93, and the concurrent introduc-
tion of a phased programme for reaching mini-
mum standards of capital adequacy. The applica-
tion of more rigomus accounting standards has
revealed a high lcvel of non-performing assets
and low levels of capital. Banks are currently
engaged in increasing provisions, improving
recovery where this is possible, and raising ad-
ditional capital, This process of clcan-up is likely
to take three or four years. Concurrently, we are
revamping the bank supervision machinery, with
Lhc establishment of an autonomous Board for
Financial Supervision under the umbrella of the
Reserve Bank.
Towards Interest Rate Liberalisation
33. To avoid destabilising shifts in portfolios,
there needs to he parallel deregulation of interest
rates in the hanking system and in the govern-
ment securities markets. With regard to banking
system interest rates, there has been a steady
process of liberalisation, consistent with the
needs of monetary policy and the condition of
the banks. From a situation where varying inter-
est rates were specified for a variety of end-
users, currently only two lending rates are
specified by the RBI for specific credit limits and 488 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN April 1994
a minimum lending rate is established for all
borrowers with credit limits above Rs. 2 lakhs
(approximately $ 6,500). On the deposits side,
while there is an administered savings deposit
rate, only a ceiling term deposit rate has heen
tixed. Banks are required to offer differentiated
term deposit rates for three differenl maturities.
34. In mid- 199 1, the most pressing rled was
stabilisation, which required the administered
minimum lcnding ralc of banks to be raised to
20 per cent. As inflationary and balance of pay-
ments pressures eased, the minimum lending rate
has bccn brought down to 15 per cent in stages.
Each downward adjustnlent in lending rate has
been accompanied by almost equal adjustments
in deposit rates to protect hank profitability.
35. This steady process of deregulation has
helped banks to accustom to better pricing of as-
sets and liabilities and to the nced to manage
interest rate risk across their balance sheets. As
banking system balance sheets and managements
strengthen and as international influences on
domestic markets strengthen, these remaining ad-
ministered stipulations can be removed.
36. On the general question of the structure
of intcrest rates, the objective of monetary policy
will be to reduce the number of interest rates that
are prescribed by the ccntral monetary zuthority,
tahng into account the need for certain conces-
sional rates. Eventually, we are expected to move
towards a situation in which one of the rates of
the Reserve Bank would emerge as a 'Reference
Rate' in relation to which other rates in the
market may be determined. Interest rate is a vari-
able which is significantly influenced by Central
bank actions. As part of monetary policy, the
monetary authority will have to decide from time
to time what the behaviour of interest rate should
be and accordingly use the instruments at its dis- debt. The RBI Aould eventually withdraw fmm
its role as an underwriter for government
securities and limit its operations to purchase and
sale in the secondary market. For this to happen,
there needs to be development of an appropriate
systcm of primary dealers in government debt;
this is discussed below.
38. Just as important is that the system of ad
hoc Treasury bills should end, so that all primary
government funding requirements are met from
the market, leaving the RBI to operate exclu-
sively in lhe secondary market, in discharge of
its monetary policy rcsp~nsibilities. With the in-
crease in market absorption of various auctioned
treasury bills and dated sccuritics of Central
government, I have proposed that the automatic
accommodation by the Reserve Bank of Central
government's cash deficit through the
mechanism of ad hoc treasury bills should be
phased out by 1996-97. Thereafter, the entire
Central government borrowing rcquiremcnt
should be met by market instruments at market
terms. If, for short-term budgetary management,
RBl's accommodation is still needed, this shoultl
be through ways and means advances for short
periods as in the case of State governments.
39. A related issuc in moving to freer rates is
that the current practice of a 'cap rate' setting
the maximum yield to be offered on government
securities would need to go. This cap currently
is applicable to borrowing by Stale governments
and government- guaranteed institutions insofar
as their debt is 'placed' at a fixed price. ralher
than being auctioned. There is no set view as yet
on how best to make the borrowings of the State
governments (and that of other institutional bor-
rowers) markd-determined, as there is a serious
concern for borrowing rates not to be excessively
differentiated hetwecn financially stronger and
weaker States.
posal.
Stimulating Primary and Secondary Market
37. Moving towards fully market-determined Development
interest rates on government securities requires
policy evolution and market evolution in both the 40. There are intimate links between the
primary and secondary markets for government development of the primary and the secondary April 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
markets. Trading in liquid secondary markets tivity by other interested parties, the Reserve
helps to establish a market yield curve and to Bank has proposed to establish a Securities Trad-
support a network of specialist traders in govern- ing Corporation in India. This institution would
ment paper, who can be used in the distribution endeavor to play a role of market maker by
of fresh issues. Deregulation of interest rates providing two-way quotes for government
should both promote and be facilitated by an ac- securities and public sector bonds. it would ac-
tive secondary market in government securities. tively buy and sell securities at market brices
4 1. In well-developed securities markets,
securities dealers and brokers offer depth and li-
quidity. A system of primary dealers also helps
ihe borrowing operations of the Government
through market making and dealing functions.
Development of such an institutional structure in
India will require addressing several problems.
Though Government securitjes are listed on the
major stock exchanges of the country, little trade
is done on these exchanges. Instead, the secon-
dary market in Government sccuritics remains an
'over the counter' or 'telephone market'. There
is also inadequate differentiation between the
broking and dealing functions. This was partly
responsible for irregularities in securities trans-
actions in 1992. As a follow-up, several
measures have been introduced, redefining the
role of brokers in Government sccurities trans-
actions and also improving settlement systems.
Capital adequacy and other prudential norms for
brokers are being developed and put in place by
the Securities and Exchange Board of India.
42. As far as dealing is concerned, the major
traders in securities are primarily banks, in-
surance corporations and Provident Funds. They
also happen lo be the final investors in Govern-
ment securities. Furthermore, statutory require-
ments though reduced, still exist, forcing these
institutiohs to hold government securities. In this
environment, it becomes an extremely difficult
task to designate a sub-set of the group of inves-
tors as primary dealers. As the ownership of
government securities gets more broad - based
and when interest rates get fully deregulated, a
system of primary dealers could be expected to
emerge.
43. To provide immediate Uquidity to govern-
ment paper and to stimulate market-making ac- providing liquidity and facilitating turnover for
various maturities. At the same time a National
Stock Exchange of India Ltd. (NSE) promoted
by a group of public sector financial institutions,
is also being set up to tradc in both debt instru-
ments and equities in a fully automated system.
The exchange is expected to become operational
by lid- 1994.
44. At present, Non-Resident Indian (NRIs-
individuals, firms with predominant ownership
by NRIs etc.) are permitted to invest in govern-
ment securities without restriction. However no
movc has been made to encourage ownership or
trading of government securities by foreign in-
vestors and dealers, even though interest has
been evinced by these bodies.
45. When coupon interest payments are made
to owners of securities, tax is deducted at source
and a tax deduction certificate is given. As tax
treatment of different institutions differs and
some institutions are completely exempt from
tax, this practice has encouraged what is called
'voucher trading' around interest payment dates.
1 have proposed that this practice should be dis-
continued for development of genuine secondary
market in government securities.
46. While we have been successful in im-
plementing an auction system through the use of
tenders, there is a time gap between an-
nouncement, acceptance of bids, payments and
settlement. Technological improvements should
make this more time efficient. A lot of educa-
tional and training effort is also needed before
putting in. place sophisticated system of auction.
Overall, the system should become more
transparent, giving feedback to the market for
competitive price farmation. The quantum of
securities issued in auctions should be pre-an- RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN April 1994
nounced and the auction should clcar the market
through competitive bidding,
47. The Reserve Bank of India has also taken
a series of steps to bring about an efficient
Electronic Clcaring Scttlcrncnt and Depository
System 41) respcct of Government securities. A
systcm of delivcry versus payment is being
developed to reducc the counter-party risk and
risk of diversion of funds through securities
transactions. Comn~unication links between dif-
ferent Public Dcbt Offices in the country arc also
being strengthened.
Moving to Indirect Monetary Instruments
48. An active secondary lnarkct in Govern-
ment securities and Ihc deregulation of interest
rates will make possible the strengthening of in-
direct tools of nionclary control. Most central
banks conduct open market operations on lhc
basis of a framework linking an operating target
like hank reserves, monetary base or primary
money with the ovcrall liquidity in the systcm
captured through a monetary indicator. In India,
for purposes of monetary control, the broad
money measure M3 has remained the target
variable and the source of reserve money crca-
tion (usually the RBI's credit to government)
was thc operating variable. However, control was
also exercised through bank credit as an inter-
mediate target. Thus, cash reserve ratio and
refinance policies were combined with selective
credir control, credir targets and administered in-
terest rates, to acheve the monetary goals.
49. With the phased implementation of' reduc-
tion in sttutory liquidity ratio to 25 pcr cent and
the cash reserve ratio to 10 per cent within a
period of about 3 years, Reserve Bank has to
develop other methods fhr regulating ovcrall li-
quidity in the system. Open market operations
will emerge as a major tool of monetary conuol.
What will follow is the management of the
Central bank balance shcet in terms of domcstic
and foreign assets. This broader approach to monetary management may give more manoeuv-
rability and also establish a linkage between
interest rate management and exchange rate
management. For example, larger inflows of
foreign exchange and the Central bank's inter-
vention to buy up such inflows with a view to
stabilising the domestic currency rates might
result in inflationary pressures unless they are
sterilized through open market operations. Thus.
thc management of domestic assets and foreign
exchange &$sets has to be viewed togethcr.
50. With the emergence of several money
market inslrumcnts which are close substitutes
for bank deposits. a set of paramclers like li-
quidity, total credit, public borrowing require-
ments, etc. along with one or two broad money
indicators like M3 will need to be watched con-
tinually.
5 1. For the purpose of conducting open
market operations, the Reserve Bank has LO
strengthen ils own capacity to estimate and
project the period to period growth in operating
targets and use its halancc sheet management to
regulatc the trajectory of the operating targct.
Side by side, the impact of' Ccntral bank's inter-
vention on overall liquidity has to be adequately
captured so that the efficacy of different instru-
ments could hc studied before a definite operat-
ing framework gels validated.
52. The transition from a controlled to a
market-driven financial system is complicatcd,
delicate and risky. It involves simultanccrus and
coordinated action on a number of fronts. Our
somewhat deliberate pace on these issues has oc-
casionally evoked impatience from commen-
tators. I believe that we have made good progress
in nurturing a securities market. 1 have no doubt
that, as reform in the fiscal and financial areas
proceeds, we will succeed in establishing a firm
foundation for an efficient debt market and in
evolving appropriate tools of monetary manage-
ment to subserve the overall objectives of
monetary policy.