May 1993
SPEECH RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
GROWTH OF COMPUTERISATION IN
THE BANKING INDUSTRY*
C. Rangarajan
It is a pleasure lo be here in your midst today
and to inaugurate the networking of ATMs and
After Hour -itory service of the Indian Bank.
It is a sisnif~cant step since technological
innovation today has become a critical factor,
transforming the way banks are being run. I
understand that different ATMs set up at various
branches will be interconnected through a central
computer. I am sure the customers of Indian Bank
will benefit greatly from this on line real time
ATM service. The After Hour Depository service
should also prove to be of great help to the trading
community which can deposit their cash financial sector and more particularly the bang
system in India must change. Banking industry
faces challenges requiring boldness, vision and
innovation. In the task of moderrtising the Indian
banking industry, and thereby enhancing its
profitability and viabilily, the use of computer and
communicalion technology will he a major role
to play. The issue today is no longer whether
technology is needed, as much as how much, how
quickly and what type.
Growth of Computerisation in the Banking
Industry
collectio$ after the bank's business hours. I There are some areas of banking in which congratulate the Indian Bank on this pioneering compukrisation has a,resdy made siw,cuficmm effort. progress. The major examples are the introduction
Banking world over has undergone a massive
change under the impact of revolutionary changes
in computer and communication technologies.
Technology has, so to say, become the fuel for
change. Many of the world's biggest and
successful banks have grown our of the
technological changes which they are able to
identify early. A major consequence of these
changes is a blurring of the financial frontiers in
terms of instruments, institutions and markets.
Effectively, universal banking has become the
trend. With the dismantling of exchange controls
and the extra-ordinary developments in
communication sysms, funds have started
moving rapidly from one country to another. Some
have even described this as the "End of
Geography."
As we conclude nearly two years of the
programme of economic refonns initiated in July
1991 and continue to move ahead with the process
of structural adjustments, there is a general
agreement, more than ever before, that the
+ Addma given by C. Rurgmrjm, Govunor, Rmc
Bmk of India at the inauguntion of Networtring of ATME
urd AHD SGNicos, Indian Bank, T. Nqgar, M.dnt on hy
18, 1993. of computerised clearing of cheques at the
metropolitan towns, and establishing links wifh the
international communication system of SWIFT,
With an annual growth rate of 12 percent in the
number of cheques to be processed in the
metropolitan towns, I wonder what would have
happened if we had not taken steps to ~ucc
cheques based on MICR technology and
computerised clearing. The daily volume of
clearing instruments at Bombay is now estimated
to be 6.6 lakhs. Forty three banks are currently
comected to the international communication
system of SWIFT. I understand that in February
1993, the outward message traffic through SWLPT
was 27,000 while the inward uaffic was 97,000.
The domestic communication network of
BANKNET which has 30 banks as its members
is yet to stabilise.
As regards the computerisation programme in
the banks, despite massive growth, until tariy
803, the computer use was extremely limited. The
RBI Committee on Mechanisation in Banking
Industry, set up in 1983, had outlined a specific
programme of camputerisation for banks at the
branch, regionaVzona1 offices and the head office. RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BUUEfIN May 1993
In 1988, a second Committee on Computerisation
was set up by RBI to have a re-look at the
progress made in computerisation, specially in
view of the growing volume of transactions,
rapidly changing computer technology and
problems associated with the implementation of
the recommendations of the first report Apart
from dealing with computerisation at various
operating levels, it also dealt with communication
networks for banks and automatic teller machines.
As of March 1, 1993, 6249 ALPMs have been
installed in 2303 branches. The number of mini-
computers installed in regionaVzonal offices add
up to 307. 13 banks have installed mainframe
computers in Head Offices. 28 branches have
been taken up for full computerisation. As on
January 1, 1993, nearly 34000 officers had
received various types of computer training to
acquire knowledge and understanding of computer
concepts and processes. 18500 persons had been
trained for ALPMs and data entry.
While these numbers are impressive when
related to the position in early 1980s, they are far
from providing the banking industry with the
foundation required to fully avail of the benefits
of computerisation.
Computerisaton and Banking Productivity and
Eficiency
The four major objectives of computerisation
in banking are to improve (a) customer service,
(b) house keeping, (c) decision making, and (d)
productivity and profitability. A question that is
often raised is whether in order to achieve these
objectives computerisation is at all necessary.
Speed and accuracy are the hallmark of
computers. Computers have a vital role to play
wherever there is a huge volume of transactions
and the work has to be completed within a
specified time frame. These are precisely the
attributes that characterise banking operations.
The argument that whatever work that can be done
manually should continue to be done manually,
can lead to t& most absurd situations in almost
all walks of life. The iwc~ of the use of compwer
technology on improving customer service is quite clearly seen from the computerised raihvay
reservation system. Almost all of us rww
appreciate the case with which railway
reservations ate made. As provider of public
service, and in the character of public spirited
institutions, there is no reason why banks should
lag behind in this regard. Consumers today are
becoming more discerning and demanding. There
is a price on their time and therefore when they
visit a branch for a deposit or & cheque
encashment, they are looking for a quick
settlement of their transactions. As the number of
transactions increase, banks will have to cope with
another problem - house keeping. Speedy
reconciliation of transactions apart from
improving housekeeping, also helps to reduce the
scope for irregularities and frauds. Thus, the
advantages flowing from computerisation are
many and all working in the banking industry must
recognise it.
It is therefore time that the banking industry
took stock of the situation and outlined a well-
defined and time-bound program on the nature and
extent of computerisation. The views of the RBI
Committees of 1983 and 1989 are still valid today
and offer a workable framework. Banks should
draw up plans to (a) establish the relevance of
computers and computer technology in their bank,
(b) reorganise themselves for greater technology
absorption, (c) assess what is required for branch,
regional and head office levels, (d) develop in-
house reliance, and (e) manage relations with staff
based on local conditions. It has to be understood
that for investment in computer systems to yield
the desired results, computer systems must be
fully integrated with work methods and
information flows.
The main objectives of computerisation at the
branch level should be to imprwe customer
service, quality of housekeeping and generation of
data for belter management control. At the
regional and head-office levcls, the purpose of
computerisation should be to store, arulyee and
retrieve data received from branches 00 ar to
generate speedy infmatim for strengthening
internal control over branches for @icy
formulation. May 1993 RESEIRVE BANK OF INDIA BULLElPI 747
The Second Report on computerisatim laid emphasis on on-line transaction processing at the
much stress an branch level computerisation. It branch level is due to the fact that only if the data
recommended that in the case of all large branches are initially captud in tbe machines, fuRher
above a daily voucher load of 750, all items of processing becoma speedier and easier.
work at the branch should be computerised. In the
case of such branches, the retxmmendation was Conclusion
to move away from a scheme of computerisation
which is confined to operation of dedicated
machines at the counters as such a scheme would
lead to a less than optimal use of the machines.
A more efficient system of computerisation at the
branch level would be one of real-time transaction
processing combined with a net.working of. all
machines or terminals. Such on-line systems
would hdp not only to update customer balances
but also simultaneously generate all subsidiary
books, general ledger accounts and MIS reports
and thereby avoid duplication at back office. This
would also enable a customer to go to any counter
convenient to him and transact business. Selected
branches in a city should also be connected to one
another. This connectivity among branches would
result in improved customer service.
The programme of computerisation suggested
has been extremely selective taking into account
various concerns. While recommending the
selection of branches for computerisation, the
Committee emphasised the need for gradual and
phased but effective way of introducing
computerisation. Its recommendation of
computerising those branches with a workload of
750 vouchers and above per day would cover
2000 to 2500 branches, located mostly in 30
identified meuopolitan/urban centres. However.
this would cwer 51% of the total banking
transactions in India. The Committee further
recammended that among these branches 500
large branches with a load of 1500 or above
vouchers per day are to be fully computerised in
the first phase and the remaining 1500 to 2000
bnrnches with a workload of 750 to 1500 vouchers
a day arc to be computerised in the second phase.
Even in relation to these branches back office
prations should be computerised in the first
phase itself.
'Ihe emphasis on branch level computerisation
is for two impartant reasons. first, customer
interface is at the maximum at the branch level.
fncrenoed use of computers and advanced
technology can lad to reduction in waiting time,
accuracy in reporting statement of accounts and
expeditious trmsfer of funds. All these will lead
to improved cumr service. Second, the The objective of computerisatim in India is not
to replace man with machines. Rathu the
objective is to make worklife mon meaningful.
Banks should conduct an intensive drive to
&mystify computers and build greater awareness
of them. Computers are no longer esoteric
products. We are rapidly turning into Peter
Drucker's "knowledge" society. Belonging as we
do to an industry which is the largest procesaux
of information and data, reliance on technology
is inevitable. Efforts must therefore be made to
create a favourable environment so that all
employees begin to demonsuate a positive attitude
towards computerisation and display a willingness
to explore what computer technology can offet
them.
It is necessary to reassure everyone that the
envisaged computerisation programme will not
result in any reduction in labour employed. Some
reallocation of work, however, will become
necessary. In fact, much of the drudgery involved
in the routine type of work will be taken away
in this process. This has indeed been the
experience wherever computerisation has been
introduced. The rapid expansion which lies ahead
of the banking industry, which computerisation
will itself help to bring about, will provide
increased employment opportunities. As a sewice
industry, improved eflciency in bankr will kud
to a fmer rate of growth in output and help to
expand employment all around. Tk wmIpCice in
the industry must, therefore, look won
computerisation as a means to improve customer
service and should welcome ir in that spirl.
Needless to say that absorption and effective
utilisation of the new technology will involve
changes in saucture, organisation and systems as
well as attitudes of people working in the industry.
Management and trade unions must 11?cogni8e
that it is only by adapting themsdves to the newly
emerging challenges and opportunities,
technological and otheNviee, that they cm mrlre
Indian banking system healthy and vibrant and
thereby convert it into an effective In- of
modemisation, growth and &velopme~\t of our
country.