Page 1 of 16
Edited Transcript of Reserve Bank of India’s
Fifth Bi- monthly Monetary Policy Press Conference
December 0 5, 2018
PARTICIPANTS FROM RBI:
DR. URJIT  R. PATEL – GOVERNOR
MR. N. S. VISHWANATHAN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. VIRAL V. ACHARYA – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
MR. B. P. KANUNGO – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
MR. M. K. JAIN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. MICHAEL D. PATRA  – EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Page 2 of 16 Dr. Urjit R Patel:  Good afternoon, everyone . Thank you for coming to the press
conference for the Fifth Bi -monthly of this fiscal year. The Monetary
Policy Committee evaluated current and evolving macroeconomic
conditions and voted today to maintain status quo while reiterating its
commitment to achieving the medium -term target for headline inflation
of 4% on a durable basis. We noted that the global economy is likely
slowing;  the outlook is weighed down by decelerating global trade,
ongoing trade tensions  and expectations of slowing demand. Crude  oil
prices have declined by close to 30% since the peak in early October at about the time of the last policy, reflecting higher supplies and easing of geopolitical tensions . In many key Emerging Market Economies
(EMEs) , inflation has risen but the recent  retreat in energy prices and
stabilizing of currencies may have a salutary impact going forward. Global financial markets have been volatile. With the easing of the US Dollar, emerging market currencies in recent weeks have been trading
with an appreciati ng bias .
Domestically , GDP growth slowed in Quarter 2 due to moderation in
private consumption and net exports; however, the MPC noted that
gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) expanded by double -digits for
the third consecutive quarter and the growth of imports ac celerated
relative to ex ports , attesting to the underlying strength of domestic
demand. Seasonally adjusted capacity utilization at 76.4% was above
the long -term average of 74.9%.
The latest round of the Reserve Bank’s Industrial Outlook Survey
reflects stable business sentiment in Q uarter 3 with sustained optimism
about production and exports. This dovetails with the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMI) for manufacturing and services that remained
in expansion mode in November. In fact, the composi te PMI O utput
Index touched a  two year high of 54.5 in November. On a year -on-year
basis, non- food bank credit grew at 15.3% as on the reporting Friday of
November 23, 2018. This is faster than the growth of nominal GDP.  Page 3 of 16 Moreover, the flow of bank credit has become increasingly broad -
based with even credit to industry emerging out of contraction from
November 2017 and posting positive growth thereafter. Inclusive of banks ’ investments in commercial papers, shares, bonds and
debentures, the adjusted non- food bank credit increased by 15.6%. The
total flow of resources to the commercial sector from banks and non-bank sources together has increased year -on-year by over 50% as on
November 23
rd.
Turning to inflation, the MPC observed that retail CPI inflation dipped to an intra -year low of 3.3% in October, cool ed down by food price s
plunging into deflation, whereas inflation relating to fuel remained elevated , and excluding food and fuel , CPI inflation accelerated to
6.1% . While near -term households’  inflation expectation s softened,
they remained unchanged for the 12- months ahead horizon.
In our assessment of external factor developments, the MPC noted that India’s merchandis e exports rebounded in October but imports also
grew at a faster pace and co nsequently, the trade deficit widened.  On
the financing side, net FDI flows moderated in relation to a year ago ,
while during the year up to November, there were net portfolio outflows. On the other hand, Non-Resident deposits increased
markedly. Reflectin g these developments, India’s foreign exch ange
reserves were at about $394 billion as on November 30
th. India and
Japan have agreed to enter into a bilateral swap arrangement of $75 billion which will provide a partial backstop to foreign exchange
reserves and enhance  the capability of the Reserve Bank to stabilize
the foreign  exchange market in situations of heightened market
volatility and sudden stops and/or reversals of capital flows.
On the outlook, the MPC was of the view that the broad- based
weakenin g of food prices and the sharp decline in international crude
oil prices imparts a downward bias to the headline inflation trajectory
going forward. In contrast, there has been a broad- based increase in  Page 4 of 16 inflation in non- food groups. Accordingly, taking all  these together,
inflation is projected at 2.7% to 3.2% in the second half of 2018- 19
and 3.8% to 4.2% in the first half of 2019- 20, with risks tilted to the
upside. Although recent food inflation prints  have surprised on the
downside and prices of petrole um products ha ve softened
considerably, it is important to monitor their evolution closely and
allow heightened short -term uncertainties to be resolved by incoming
data.
As regards growth projection s, the MPC observed that going forward,
lower Rabi sowing may adversely affect agriculture and hence rural
demand. Financial market volatility, slowing global demand and rising
trade tensions pose some downside risks to exports. On the other hand, the decline in crude oil prices is expected to boost corporate ear nings
and raise private consumption through higher disposable income s.
Increased capacity utilization in the manu facturing sector porten ts well
for sustaining the acceleration in investment activity. As mentioned,
bank credit growth has strengthened, and they should support
productive sectors of the economy. Accordingly, GDP growth for
2018- 19 has been retained at 7.4% which means 7.2- 7.3% in the
second half and for the first half of 2019- 20 at 7.5% with risks
somewhat to the downside.
A key point the  MPC discussed was that uncertainty around the
projection remains rather large , as while recent downward surprises
have been large, the y have also been over a very short period of time .
First, few more months of data are needed to ascertain the full impact
of Minimum Support Prices on food inflation and the prices of several
food items are at unusually low levels, there is a risk of sudden
reversal , especially of volatile perishable item s. Secondly and equally
importantly, volatility indicators for crude oil prices and financial markets have not softened, suggesting that the re remains considerable
uncertainty in oil prices and international financial markets outlook,   Page 5 of 16 depending among other factors , on OPE C supply decision later this
week and how the trade war  truce or otherwise plays out. Finally, fiscal
slippages, if any , at the center and/or state level s will influence the
inflation outlook, heighten market volatility and crowd out private
investment.
On balance, the MPC wa s of the view that incoming data w ill help
ascertain the durable nature of recent inflation softening and allow
better judgment on future policy action. Hence, given the assessment that growth will likely remain healthy for the rest of the year, the MPC retained its stance at calibrated ti ghtening, so as to buy time to pause,
reflect and undertake future policy action with more robust inflation signal s. If the upside risks  we have flagged do not materialis e or are
muted in their impact , as reflected in incoming data, there is a
possibility of space opening up for commensurate policy actions by the
MPC.
I will now request Dr. Acharya to say a few words.
Dr. Viral V. Acharya:  Thank you, Governor. Good afternoon, everyone. I am going to
mainly talk on various aspects of liquidity management by the Reserve
Bank. Since the last MPC meeting, the Weighted Average Call Rate, at
which money market participants transact in the unsecured funding
market on an overnight basis , continues to remain soft and below the
policy rate on average. This has been possible due to deployment of a
variety of liquidity tools.
I will mention the three primary ones: RBI has injected durable
liquidity through Open Market Operation purchases to the tune of now
` 1.36 trillion in the current financial year. The pace of our OMOs has
stepped up with the injection of slightly over ` 1 trillion in the last
three months. Second, the Reserve Bank has also provided liberal
infusion of liquidity through T erm Repos in addition to the usual
provision via the  LAF or the Liquidity Adjustment Facility.  Third, as a  Page 6 of 16 supplementary measure, facility to avail liquidity  for Liquidity
Coverage Ratio or FALLCR as it is called,  was increased with effect
from October 1st to enhance the ability of individual banks to avail of
liquidity if required from the repo markets.
Based on our assessment of durable liquidity needs , going forward, we
have already announced an OMO purchase program me of ` 400 billion
or ` 40,000 crores for this month of December. We expect that this
increased frequency and quantum of OMO purchases may be  required
until end of March, but the exact calibration will depend on sustain ed
changes in the behavior of currency in circulation and the magnitude of
sterilis ation operations for RBI's forex  operations  which of course keep
evolving with external sector conditions.  Second, we also plan to
conduct additional long- term repo operations to meet transient liquidity
demand that is likely to emerge later this month on account of the third
tranche of advance tax outflows.
Two things  in the supplementary Developmental and Regulatory
Policies or Part-B that relate to liquidity: First is an operational change.
It has been decided by the RBI that we will provide information on the
daily CRR balance of the banking system to market partici pants on the
very next day instead of two to three days at present so as to help individual banks improve their liquidity assessment. Second and more
important - market liberalization. It was proposed in the B i-monthly
Monetary P olicy S tatement in April of  this year that non- residents shall
be given access to the R upee interest rate derivatives markets in India.
The draft directions in this regard will be issued after close of market today for public feedback. They propose allowing non- residents to
hedge the Rupee interest rate risk flexibly by using any available
interest rate derivative instrument in the Indian markets. Non -residents
who are already permitted to participate in interest rate futures market will going forward also be permitted to participate  in the Overnight
Index Swap or the OIS market for non- hedging purposes , subject to a  Page 7 of 16 macro prudential limit on the collective exposure of all non- residents,
in terms of the interest rate risk that is being undertaken.  We think this
is a pretty important reform in the interest rate risk sharing markets.
Just excuse my indulgence, I am going to now discuss in some detail
the issue of funding liquidity for the NBFCs and the HFCs. The Reserve Bank has been watching the mar ket developments on this
front quite closely since end of August. We have been in regular touch with SEBI to assess the fallout in terms of mutual fund redemptions and the resulting rollover risk for NBFCs and HFCs. As I mentioned earlier, the Reserve Bank  continues to provide system -wide liquidity at
an augmented quantum and pace. In addition and specifically for NBFCs and HFCs, we have increased the liquidity that banks can raise against the ir G-Sec holdings as collateral, specifically also for on-
lending to NBFCs and HFCs  and we have also relaxed the
concentration limits on banks for lending to individual NBFCs and
HFCs . The concentration limit has been increased from 10% to 15%.
Importantly, the Reserve Bank has also taken measures to facilitate
asset an d risk transfers within the financial system. This can be
considered as re -intermediation across financial players of risks. We
believe this is healthy for financial stability , overall. Just to give an
example, when banking sector was getting recapitali sed in the wake of
corporate NPA recognition, NBFCs and HFCs picked up their market share. So to this end, so to facilitate re- intermediation of this type, the
Reserve Bank has taken two measures; first, it has allowed banks to provide partial credit enhancem ent on bonds issued by NBFCs /HFCs.
This will help raise the credit quality of these bonds and thereby attract mutual funds to provide greater rollover funding to NBFCs and HFCs. And second, we have also relaxed the rules for securitization by
NBFCs and HFCs , which should allow the risks to transfer to better
funded bank balance sheet s.  Page 8 of 16 I want to stress that these measures have been carefully chosen from
the full set of available options based on our analysis of the reasons
behind the funding stress for NBFC s and HFCs. Our assessment is that
these measures have collectively eased the funding stress in a steady manner over the past two months. They have given NBFCs and HFCs time and the opportunity to make their own balance sheet adjustments on both asset and liability side , in particular , improve the duration
structure of their liabilities.
Let me conclude, the Reserve Bank is guided by and large by the principle of addressing system wide liquidity. The Reserve Bank also stands ready to be the lender of last resort, but that is provided conditions warrant that sort of an extreme measure. In our assessment there is no such necessity at the present, given the sound health of our economy. And as Governor explained in detail, we are at a level of aggregate credit growth, which remains comfortably in excess of
nominal GDP growth with a fairly robust distribution across various
sectors. Thank you.
N. S. Vishwanathan:  I want to highlight a few policies from Part B. We have been moving towards enhanc ing transparency in interest rates on  loans. As a part of
this, we moved from  Base Rate to MCLR , which is more transparent
than Base Rate. But i n furtherance  of this objective , now we are
making it mandatory for banks that loans after 1
st April , 2019 for
personal retail segment and MSE (M icro and Small Enterprises ) will
be linked to an external benchmark. So, w e have listed a few
benchmarks and also allowed them to use  any other  benchmark that
FBIL  will come with. And the actual interest rate will be a spread over
the base rate or the benchmark rate, which the banks can determine on their own. But that spread is variable only if there is a change in the credit rating of the borrower as per the conditions of the loan agreement . So, this will bring l ot more transparency in inter est rate and
the borrower will know the terms at which he has been lent.   Page 9 of 16  Second, we had announced in April policy that we want to bring in a
mandatory loan component in respect of the cash credit limits that large borrowers en joy. So, we are now coming out with final
guideline s. We had issued draft guidelines . Response had come . And
based on that , we are  issuing final guidelines that  take effect from
April 1, 2019 that gives all the stakeholders enough time to plan and
transition in a smooth manner. Of course, as I said, we will clarify  as
how much percentage of the cash credit will have to be treated as loan
component.
The third is on aligning the LCR with SLR . The Liquidity Coverage
Ratio is one of the important liquidity measures under the Basel III as
part of the post global cris is reforms. It requires that banks maintain
high quality liquid assets (HQLA) equal to the stressed demand on
their liabilit ies for 30 days. T his was phased in starting from 2015. At
present it is  90%. From 1
st January 2019, it will become 100%. So,
what we are saying is that , as a part of this move, we are also reducing
the SLR , which is currently 19.5% over a six quarter period to 18% at
the rate of 25 basis point s in each quarter. Currently the banks are
allowed to use a part of SLR to be treated as HQLA for LCR. That will
of course continue even after this.
On the U rban Co-operative Banks front, governance , given that C o-
operative banks work under dual control of the state government and
the RBI  is something that we have been working on. So, right from the
Malegam Committee that was set up  in 2010, there was a suggestion
that the banks  should have what is called as a Board of Management,
which will work under the control of the Reserve Bank of I ndia. And
this was reiterated by High Power ed Committee under Mr. R. Gandhi
on Urban Cooperative Banks. So, we have issued a draft guideline s on
this. Based on the response that we have received, we are going to
issue final guidelines, which requires such banks to have a Board of
Management. What we are saying is that , the bank s should actually  Page 10 of 16 have in their by- laws, a provision for B oard of M anagement. And the
incentive is that , unless they have a Board of M anagement, we will not
allow them to expand thei r business , increase branches, etc. So, the
banks which want to expand will have to put in place this arrangement.
I want to also mention one thing that is not part of this policy but
something that we had announced earlier. In the October 2017 Policy,
we had announced that the banks  should have special facilities for the
senior citizen customers, and we had followed it up with a detailed
circular which requires them to have special counters, there must be doorstep services provided to them, etc. We had also made it clear that
non-compliance with these instructions will be treated as a case of
deficiency in services, which can be taken up for redressal with the Banking Ombudsman. I just want to  use this forum to reiterate that
these are very serious instru ction s that we have put in place. And, we
would request the banks to implement these instructions in to to and
grievances, i f any , which we receive from the senior citizens will be
viewed seriously. Thank you.
B.P. Kanungo:  Just wish to highlight two paragr aphs in Part -B. The first one refers to
the foreign exchange transactions. As you would recall, the Foreign
Exchange Management Act 1999, when it was enacted to govern the
cross border financial transaction s flows , it started with 25 original
regulations. But whenever we carried out an amendment or changed the rules , an amendment r egulation had to be brought out, and over a
period of time this ha d ballooned to more than 350 a mendment
regulations along with the 25 regul ations. So, we undertook an exercise
to consolidate them. Actually, the objectives were four -fold – one is,
consolidating th em into the primary regulations - 25 of them;  then align
it with an evolving business practices and the needs of the economy;
then ir on out the definitional  differences that exist across various
statutes; a nd also, to soft -code it so as to obviate  the need of further
amendments whenever you change the rules. You would have noticed  Page 11 of 16 that over a period of last one year or two years , we hav e consolidated
18 original regulations that archives 195 amendment re gulations  so far
out of the  350. In continuation of that effort, we will be amending or
rationalizing the borrowing regulations between the residents and non-
residents and bring out a new  framework for the borrowing regulations
which w ill be announced by the end of the month. There are t wo to
three majors, in the Part - B regarding consumer protection for digital
transactions . You would recall that in the recent times we have issued
guideli nes to protect the interest of the customers of the commercial
banks, non- banking financial companies who are in the business of
issuing cards and co -operative banks , so far as the consumer protection
limiting the liability of the customers for unauthorize d electronic
transactions. However, such protection is not available when the electronic transaction is originated by PPI issuer s who are non- banks.
So, it has been decided that as a measure of providing the consumer protection to all the customers of all the segments, all the issuers, and bring them to the same level ; we will issue the guidelines limiting the
consumers’ liability for unauthorized PPI transactions wh ere PPIs are
issued by non- banks. The framework w ould prescribe the limits after
which the c ustomer may bear the liability against the contributory
frauds, negligence or deficiency on the part of the issuer, third party breach where the deficiency lies with neither the issuer nor the customer, and the maximum loss due to negligence of customer, e tc.
And, we  propose to issue the guidelines by the end of this month as
well. Thank you.
Dr. Ur jit R. Patel:  Thank you Mr. Kanungo. Mr. Jain.
M. K. Jain:  A very good afternoon friends. I will give a brief per spective on two
policy announcements, one on Ombudsman scheme for digital
transaction s. The Reserve Bank’s endeavor to build a less -cash society
has facilitated a significant rise in the volumes, value and channels for conducting digital transaction s. For promoting the level of trust and  Page 12 of 16 customer confi dence in this powerful channel that has wide and deep
reach , a dedicated and empowered grievance redressal mechanism is a
prerequisite. Accordingly, an Ombudsman Scheme for digital
transaction s is being formulated by the Reserve Bank to provide a cost -
free and expeditious avenue for handling the rising number and
growing complexity of such complaints. The Ombudsman Scheme for digital transaction s will be administered and funded by the Reserve
Bank and w ill cover entities falling under the Reserve Bank’s
regulatory jurisdiction, it means beyond banking as well, providing
related services.
The next is setting up an expert committee on M icro, Small, and
Medium enterprises (MSMEs) . Micro, S mall and M edium enter prises
are one among the most important sectors forming the backbone of the
Indian economy. Despite contributing significantly to the economy, large number of MSME units exist in in formal space and face
difficulty in accessing credit. Reserve Bank has recently taken several
steps, such as, setting up of Trade Receivables Discounting System ,
which is called TReDS, operationalization of national mission for capacity  building of bankers for financing MSME sector, allowing
banks to co- originate loans with non -banking financial companies, etc.,
to facilitate flow of credit to the sector. In order to enable MSMEs tide
over the impact of demonetization and GST, Reserve Bank also undertook regulatory forbearance in prudential norms. However, the increasing stress in  the sector is a matter of concern. A comprehensive
approach needs to be adopted to understand the problems of the MSME s and the challenges faced by them for a holistic development
of the sector. Keeping this in view, an expert committee would be constitut ed by the Reserve Bank of India to identify causes and
propose long- term solutions for the economic and financial
sustainability of MSME sector. The composition of the committee and
its terms of reference will be finalized by the end of December 2018,
and report will be due by end- June 2019. Thank you.  Page 13 of 16 Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Thank you very much, Mr. Jain. We will take a few questions.
Economic Times?
Govardhan Rangan :
Economic Times
Thank you, Governor. You have given some hope of reversing the rate
cycle if t he upside risk s do not materialize. So, when the reversal
happens , will it depend on your first half, second half  forecast of
inflation in the  next fiscal? On the other hand, is it that so many
months of undershooting of inflation target  is required for you to
change the course of the  interest rate cycle ?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Well, as we have mentioned very clearly, including in the Resolution
and in my opening remarks , is that we need few more data points to
ascertain the durability of the decline in inflation that has taken place in a very short period of time, especially with respect to oil, the implied volatility now is actually higher than in October, although the
price of oil has come down. So, with incoming data , our projections
will change and we will  take a call as and when required.
Nivrita Ganguly :
BTVI
This is a follow -up really on that question. There has been a sharp
downward revision that we have seen for the inflation forecast. In fact, the mid -point of the second half  projection is below the  target of 4%.
Why  then has the stance been retained at calibrated tightening? And in
that case if this remains the stance, should we expect going ahead , as
long as inflation is below that target, we will see a hold on rates?
Dr. Viral V. Acharya:  It is a good question and in some sense , the volatility of data
make the decision somewhat difficult. But , I think I would like to
stress two things . One, we have to look for inflation staying at our
target rate at medium -term horizon. So, I think in some sense at  Q2 of
2019- 20, the number is 4.2%, which is basically implying that as of  Page 14 of 16 now we are still slightly above the target at a 12 -month horizon. So,
what has really happened is that the two surprises in food and oil in a
very short period of time have of cours e brought the projections down
quite significantly. Nevertheless, the medium -term target actually
remains above the headline target. So, I think we need to observe the data for a couple more months, first, to see if these recent prints are durable or not . The recent prints have also created massive uncertainty,
as Governor said, actually surprisingly when oil prices rise ; that is
typically when the implied volatility in options market for crude oil rises. But what we are observing is exactly the reverse. An d it is not
surprising because the collapse has been so dramatic in just less than four-five weeks. So, I think what we are saying is that we really need
some time in order to assess the inflation outlook better and then we
will be able to take a further p olicy action if necessary.
Pradeep Pandya :
CNBC A waaz
Governor, you said in your statement that you are seeing a n upward
bias in non- food inflation, but the food inflation is expected to fall. In
non-food inflation, what are your assumptions and what level of crude
are you considering for this forecast?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Actually, the forecast that is there in resolution is for non -food and
non-fuel. So it is not just a non -food projection, it is a non- food non-
fuel. So, the oil component has also been deleted in making the
projection for that particular category of CPI in flation. And as is
usually the case, you can get a better idea on the assumptions , if you
look at the Monetary Policy Report ( MPR ), which shows how we
make adjustments with respect to inflation projections as the oil price
and exchange rate changes. So, on oil we generally look at the futures
curve, which you also have access to. And on the exchange rate , we
maintain an exchange rate which is basically the same as what is prevailing now.   Page 15 of 16 Pradeep Pandya : What is the rate of crude in your inflation forecast?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  It is the same as the futures curve, which actually changes every day.
But we would fix it on the day that we are making the projection,
which was yesterday.
Somesh  Jha:
Business Standard
Recently analysts have talked about cut in the  CRR as a way to provide
liquidity in the system. So, was this discussed by the MPC? And if yes,
why there was a decision to keep it unchanged? Secondly, about the recent developments, do you see the usage of Section 7 of the RBI Act as an attack on the au tonomy of the RBI? And the call f or governance
reform by RBI, how do you see that?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  I will only answer the first question. With respect to the CRR, the CRR is not in the ambit of MPC. And secondly, we see no reason to use the
CRR when we  have so many other instruments at our disposal, which
Dr. Acharya and Mr. Vishwanathan enunciated, and which we have implemented over the last two months for liquidity management, which are broadly market based with some incentives, CRR is not
counted.
Bijoy Idicheriah :
Cogenc is
Just a follow -up to the point you just made, instead of doing OMOs
which also have the yield impact , even though you are balancing out
with forex  interventions at the same time; have you considered longer -
term repos as a better option to do that because it will have much lesser
impact on the actual yields in the market? Because as soon as your comments have gone out , the markets have already started reacting.
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Actually, the OMOs address durable liquidity and l onger -term repos -
we have used 28- day, 56 day-  at the end of the day, helps to smoothen  Page 16 of 16 the relatively short -term and the more frequent liquidity shortages and
surpluses. So, that is for frictional liquidity ; so the two instruments are
quite different.
Vivek Wankhede :
All India Radio
Can you just elaborate more on the relationship between RBI and the
Government?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Well, I already said that I would avoid those questions because we are
here discussing the Monetary Policy Committee R esolut ion. Thank
you.
Subhash Shirke :
News Nation
Sir, Dr. Viral Acharya has said some things in the public domain, do you agree to that? And has any decision been made with respect to
surplus funds being handed over to the Central government?
Dr. Urjit R. Pate l: Is this related to the Monetary Policy Committee resolution? I don’t
think so. We are here to discuss the Monetary Policy Committee
resolution and the macro economy.
Thank you.