Page 1 of 9 Edited Transcript of Reserve Bank of India’s First Bi- Monthly
Post Policy Press Conference
April 06, 2017
PARTICIPANTS FROM RBI:
DR. URJIT R. PATEL – GOVERNOR
MR. S. S. MUNDRA – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
MR. N. S. VISHWANATHAN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. VIRAL V. ACHARYA – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
MR. B. P. KANUNGO – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. M. D. PATRA – EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Page 2 of 9 Dr. Urjit R. Patel : Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you for coming to the First Bi -Monthly of the new fiscal
year. We take this opportunity to welcome Mr. B  P Kanungo to his first post monetary policy
press conference.
Let me start with the Monetary Policy Committees' decisi on today. The MPC made a detailed
assessment of macroeconomic and financial conditions, both domestically and globally on the
basis of its judgment on the evolving outlook  and the MPC decided unanimously to keep the
policy rate unchanged in this review. The MPC also decided to persevere with a neutral stance
of Monetary Policy. It noted that inflation is set to undershoot the target of 5% for Q4 for
2016-2017. For 2017-2018 inflation is projected to average 4.5% in the first half of the year
and 5% in the  second half with the risks  balanced around the inflation trajectory. The MPC
also noted that GVA growth could strengthen to 7.4% in the current fiscal year from 6.7% in
the last fiscal year with risks balanced.
The MPC saw the path of inflation in 2017-2018 as challenged by upside risks and unfavorable
base effects towards the second half of the year. Accordingly, inflation developments have to
be closely and continuously monitored with food price pressures kept in check so that inflation expectations can be re -anchored. Accordingly, the future course of Monetary Policy will
largely depend on incoming data on how macroeconomic conditions are evolving.
The Committee took note of the reduction in bank lending rates, but saw further scope for a
more complete  transmission, including for small savings and administered rates. In its opinion,
along with rebalancing liquidity conditions, the Reserve Bank should endeavor to put the
resolution of banks ’ stressed  assets on a firm footing and create  congenial conditions for bank
credit to revive  and flow to productive sectors of the economy.
I will touch on a couple of other issues first before I request the other Deputy Governors to
speak. Regarding the guidance on liquidity, we have provided greater clarity on how w e see
liquidity conditions evolving and the manner in which we propose to manage them with
ongoing refinements of the LAF  as recommended by the Expert Committee to revise and
strengthen the Monetary Policy framework. The objective is to more finely align t he operating
target, the weighted average call rate and money markets with the stance  of Monetary Policy.
You may recall that post demonetization there was a surge of liquidity in the system which the
RBI had to absorb to preserve financia l stability and ensure unclogged channels of monetary
transmission. At its peak, liquidity absorption was close to ` 8 trillion. The RBI employed a
mix of conventional and unconventional instruments, the first line of defense were variable reverse rate repos  of varying tenors.  The incremental CRR functioned as a placeholder till the
enhancement of the ceiling on securities under the Market Stabilization Scheme to ` 6 trillion
by the Government .
This enabled the withdrawal of the incremental CRR within a fortnight of its institution. From
the latter  half of February , the situation was well under control, greatly facilitated by the
wartime pace of re-monetization . This allowed :  Page 3 of 9 a) Progressive removal of withdra wal restrictions to completely lift off by mid-March .
b) Increasing use of our own instruments by vacating the use of MSS securities .
By the end of March, liquidity absorption was down to ` 3.1 trillion, all of which was held in
Reverse Repos .
Looking ahead, and there are details in part B, our endeavor will be to :
1). Drain out the remaining liquidity overhang .
2). Manage the new drivers of liquidity in 2017-2018 .
3). Ensure that the normal requirements of liquidity consistent with the needs of a
growi ng economy are met.
The first step, though not necessarily in chronological order, is the narrowing of the corridor to
(+ and -25)  basis points. This is a continuation of the reform initiated in April 2016 when we
narrowed the corridor to (+/ -50) basis poi nts in consonance with the recommendations of the
Expert Committee . The objective is to more finely align the money market rates with the
policy rate, bring down volatility and create conditions for improved transmission of Monetary
Policy across the whole  spectrum of interest rates. A collateral benefit that market participant
should note is that when liquidity conditions flip to a tighter  mode, the cost of funds through
the Marginal Standing F acility will be lower by 25 basis points.
The second step is the assignment of appropriate instruments to the sources of liquidity. Over the first half of the year we expect government spending to increase significantly, including
due to large redemptions. Mismatches between the Government's cash flows, balances  and
recourse to bridge  funding,  Ways and Means overdraft s will be managed by the use of Cash
Management Bills as envisaged under the arrangement with the Government put in place in
2009. Liquidity associated with forex flows will be managed with securities under the MSS,
although the budgetary provision of capping them to gross issuance is of  ` 1,00,000 crores
will be an operational constraint that circumscribes the effective use of the MS S as an
instrument of liquidity management, and increases the burden on the RBI's own instrument
mix, but we will endeavor to manage.
Durable and semi -durable liquidity will be managed with a combination of longer tenor
Reverse Repos and Open Market Operations . Fine tuning operations will continue to be used
to manage day to day mismatch es in liquidity demand and supply. We will continue to provide
assured liquidity through our regular operations under the LAF .
The learning experience through demonetization period and the constraints circumscribing
instruments such as the MSS underscores the priority warranted for strengthening the
instrument tool kit of the RBI. It is in this context that RBI has proposed the institution of the  Page 4 of 9 Standing Deposit Facility , drawing upon international best practices and the recommendation
of the Expert Committee .
We have been engaging with the government on this subject for some time and will continue to
pursue the matter with them.  When the deposit facility is instituted, market participants have
agreed that it will significantly improve the robustness of the liquidity management framework
of the RBI.
I will now turn to the issues regarding banks. An important, perhaps the most important
prerequisite for efficient transmission of Monetary Policy is a well capitalised banking sector
that is able and willing to provide credit at reasonable terms to productive parts of the economy. The capital can come from either the market or the pri nciple owner for the PSBs ,
which is the Government . Having completed the Asset Quality Review of our banks and with
several other critical ingredients in place , viz., the insolvency and bankruptcy code and the
Oversight Committee , the Reserve Bank of India  has been preparing actively for the next steps
in an orderly resolution of the bank stressed assets. This will be undertaken concomitantly with
resolution of the weakest bank balance sheets under the aegis  of a revised Prompt Corrective
Action framework (PCA ), and our new Enforcement Department that has started its work this
week.
We reiterate that further creeping forbearance in the treatment of bank losses is untenable and
costly for the rest of the economy. The measures that will be announced soon to deal with
banks  stressed assets and weak balance sheets along with the institutional strengthening that
we just alluded to ,  should hel p enjoy  confidence in our banking system, restore corporate
demand and put us on the virtuous path of health y bank credit  and industrial growth. Thank
you.
I will now request Deputy Governor, Viral Acharya, to say a few things .
Dr. Viral V. Acharya:  Just a few quick remarks on the management of surplus liquidity. I want to stress that with the
rapid pace of re -monetization  and increase in the currency in circulation as we have been
seeing, we do expect the quantum of durable surplus liquidity to come down over the next few
quarters. However, in the meantime  over the next several quarters, perhaps three to four
quarters we do need to manage the quantum of the liquidity that remains. And as the Governor
alluded to, we will employ the whole toolkit that we have at our disposal within whatever
constrain ts we face, in particular the MSS, longer tenor variable Reverse Repos , varia ble rate
Reverse Repos, Open Market Operations if necessary, however in a well caliberated and
nimble manner, so as not to have a large price impact on the G -secs. And in addition, we will
keep dealing with the short -term liquidity needs through overnight and short er tenor  and Repo
and Reverse Repo operations.
We are awaiting decision on our preferred facility which is the Standing Deposit Facility ,
beyond that we may deploy other tools if our tool kit remains constraint and contingencies that
arise so demand. Thank you.   Page 5 of 9 S. S. Mundra:  I will little bit elaborate on what Governor has already mentioned about the issue of asset
quality. We have yet to get the final results of Q4 which has just ended, but based on the
figures which were available for December quarter, the various indicators of the stressed assets they have further deteriorated during this period, though there had been some positive signal s
in the sense that the pace of acceleration of new NPAs, formation of new NPAs had relatively
come down. The Provision Coverage Ratio had moreover remained stable , so resultantly the
cost of credit in Q3 had come down. The overall capital adequacy, particularly of Public Sector
Banks in Q3 was meeting the regulatory requirement, but quit e clearly there would be more
demand on the banks’  capital as we have completed the Q4 and going forward also the capital
would be needed for supporting the growth. So, having taken stock of all this, there had been
an active engagement by the RBI as well as with the Government of India  and all the tools
which are required, all the options would be open and they would be employed. I think that
there is a clear acknowledgement and recognition that the asset quality situation in wh ich we
are, there is no one size which fits all. There would be case specific instruments which would
be required to be deploy ed and a number of them were introduced by the RBI from time to
time. So, how to bring the faster implementation of JLF  decision, how to enhance the number
or role  of Oversight Committees  or whether to look at the sectoral or size specific approaches
in achieving these resolutions   these are all the options which are being considered and which
are under active discussion.
PCA , already Governor has mentioned,  we expect to put the revised PCA framework by mid -
April and then it will become operative . There is another mention in Part B which is , of course ,
away from the usual question which always remains  in your mind, but as you know that RBI
also does a lot of developmental work, so in the area of financial  literacy you will find that
pilot project is being launched. And post pilot , I think there is an ambitious project of
nationwide financial literacy  campaign to be carried forward.  Thank you.
N. S. Vishwanathan:   Among the measures that we announced in Part B, I want to highlight couple of them. One of
course, is the decision to allow banks to invest and participate in REITS and invITS within 20
percent limit of their capital allowed for equity and e quity type instruments . But I think the
more important announcement that we are making is with regard to the branch authorization
scheme where we are moving away from emphasis on a brick and mortar branch to a fixed
location where banking service  is availa ble and the idea is that this will enable banks to
provide cost efficient service . Cost efficiency is important to facilitate financial inclusion. We
believe that this is going to result in further propping up of the financial inclusion measures by the banking industry in general and this might even facilitate for example the small finance
banks which have come on the scene to do their job even better.
B. P. Kanungo : I will refer to just one  most  important development that has been, a reference has been made
to that in the policy, this is relating to the payment and settlement system, relating to NEFT
actually  and this is consistent with the vision document that we have announced,  Payment
System  Vision Document 2018, a nd this is the introduction of the additional settlement batches
in the NEFT system. As you know, presently it is on hourly basis and the batches start from
8am in the morning till 7pm in the afternoon. While the window of time will r emain the same,  Page 6 of 9 now we will bring down the periodicity from one hourly interval to half hourly interval.
Consequently 11 more batches will be introduced which will significantly improve the customer service and increase the efficiency of the NEFT system. T hank you.
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : We will take a few questions. May I request Mint.
Participants:
Gopika Gopakumar
Mint :
Basically the question is, do you see any sort of impact coming from excess liquidity on inflation going forward?
Dr. Viral V. Acharya:  I think the important thing to keep in mind is that while there is surplus liquidity in the system
it is actually getting drained out through the large quantum of variable rate reverse repos that
we are doing. So, as of now we do not have a reason to belie ve that there is sort of leakage
happening through that in to the inflation numbers that we expect. I think the main symptom
that we are seeing is the softness of money market rates at the short end, other than the
weighted average call rate if you look at  the CBLO rate, in some cases sometimes market repo
Treasury Bill rates, these are softer and they have been at the lower end of the LAF corridor.
And a part of the intension of the narrowing of the corridor is to anchor these rates closer to our target po licy rate. And as Governor explained, of course this means that even when we are
in a tight liquidity situation, the upper end of the corridor would now be lower at 25 basis
points  above the policy rate .
Shayan Ghosh
Financial Express :
What do you think are the implications of the farm loan waiver schemes and is it a cause  of
concern for the RBI?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : There ar e several conceptual i ssues, if one were to put one’s hat as an economist on. I think it
undermines an honest credit culture, i t impacts credit discipline, it blunts incentives for future
borrowers to repay, in other words , waivers engender moral hazard. It also entails at the end of
the day transfer from tax payers to borrowers . If on account of this , overall Government
borrowing goes up,  yields on Government bonds also are impacted. Thereafter it can also lead
to the crowding out of private  borrowers as higher government  borrowing can lead to an
increase in cost of borrowing for others. I think we need to create a consensus such that loan
waiver promises are eschewed , otherwise sub -sovereign fiscal challenges in this context could
eventually affect the national balance sheet. Thank you.
Page 7 of 9 Govardhan
Economic Times :
Governor, you mentioned that forbearance is no more tenable  and that MPC is looking for
resolving the bad loans issue. What  are the specific things that the RBI proposes to do to clean
up the banking system, the bad loans?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : I think there are a variety of things that have been put into place and more will be put into
place , going forward. As Mr. Mundra mentioned and as has been enunciated in Part B of the
Policy that a revised PCA framework will now be put in public domain mid-April which will
trigger actions by the RBI vis -à-vis specific banks going forward. The IBC is now in place, the
RBI's Enforcement Department has started its work and the fact of the matter is that there
seems to be a renewed commitment from all sides, including the Government  that we now
need to address this in even a more forceful manner than we have in the past. Mr. Mundra, do
you want to add anything?
S.S. Mundra:  I think I did mention in my opening statement, one thing is very clear, a number of instruments
which were already introduced, if there is a need , there could b e relo ok even at the existing
instrument s but the message which we are trying to give is that all these instruments are meant
for resolution in a serious  sense  and not for postponement of a problem. And I think that would
be the basic focus , going forward.
Ira Dugal
Bloomberg Quint :
Just on the inflation target side, your statement says we try and  move  towards 4% in a durable
and calibrated manner . This year we are saying 4.5% in first half and 5% in the second half,
and in the Monetary Policy Report there are some staff projections for the following fiscal we
are saying we  could come to around 4.6% by the fourth quarter of the following fiscal. Should
one understand then that the RBI is comfortable with staying above that 4% mark for the next
couple of years? I mean, there is no time guidance obviously but if the projections are
suggesting that we are maintaining a neutral stance should we read into it  if we are okay with
this?
Dr. M. D. Patra : So, as yo u rightly read into the  MPR  and other places, what RBI is signaling is that the move
to 4% is going to be challenging, there are no lucky disinflationary forces in the horizon that
were there in the past. And therefore if it is in this context that they move the stance from
accommodative to neutral so that there is no one way  bets on the way the RBI moves. So, the
evolving outlook will decide how the RBI will move, but it is cautioning you that inflation is
elevated relative to where we wanted to be.
Page 8 of 9 Pradeep Pandya:
CNBC Awaaz
The Federal Reserve has taken this decision of unwinding their balance sheet. Earlier when
there were talks of removing QE, it had impacted the rupee hugely. At this time how are you
assessing this and in coming days what preparation would you  do for the same?
Dr. Viral V. Acharya : There  was a sudden shock in 2013, this time they have been  talking of this since  last two to
three years, so we are all gradually prepared for it. And I think emerging markets, including us, we are in much better shape overall. And I would actually stress that on many dimensions we
are macro -economically very stable- something that  the Government has taken actions
towards , something that RBI has actually taken lot of steps forward . So, the ‘F ed’ has a very
large balance sheet and it does create significant capital movement s in the global economy.
But we are vigilant and I think we are prepared to deal with them  with various tool s we have
available.
Shishir Mehta
Vyapar:
Some cooperative banks have complained that whenever administrator is appointed to conduct
the affairs  they are not very open to the shareholders and depositors. Do you have any take on
that? I am talking about a specific bank .
N. S. Vishwanathan : See, it is not correct to speak about a specific bank in this context.  But, please understand,
when ever administrator is appointed by superseding the  Board, it means that there are
problems in the bank and the  administrator has a new set of responsibilities to discharge  and
obviously if the Board and the shareholders were responsible enough, the need for an
administrator in the first place would not have arisen.  It is not fair for the shareholders to
complain against the administrators in that sense.
S. S. Mundra:  I woul d like to just add here, as the structure of cooperative banks  stands today, the
shareholders  and depositors are not the same thing, basically the shareholders are  the
borrowers in a cooperative bank. And to some extent may be not quoting individual bank, but they might have reached to a present situation because of some of those actions only. So I
think if administrator is working towards safeguarding the interest of the depositors, it may
appear little bit difficult to the others .
Mayur Shetty
Times of I ndia :
Governor,  the spread between the yields on long-term bonds, 15- year bonds and  home loans
has narrowed considerably,  probably  less than 100 basis points. I just wanted to  know whether
you are comfortable with this kind of narrow spread or you expect some  kind of correction
going forward?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : I mean, I do not think that at this juncture we are particularly concerned about the narrowing spread, it reflects a variety of factors, including a possibly slightly late transmission,  so that is
why it becomes evident. It could also reflect that the credit score and the credit culture in this  Page 9 of 9 particular sector continues to be good. So,  there are no reasons at the moment why we should
be concerned about the spread coming down, it is a fairly secured asset which , you know,  there
is a long history of dealing with delinquencies in the sector. So,  I think it broadly reflects
market forces and the fact that housing has become an activity where there is a fair bit of
Government support also which has made it affordable , going forward.
Lath a Venkatesh
CNBC TV 18:
To continue with what Ira asked you Governor, you are speaking about upside risks to
inflation.  So, s hould we assume that even this movement to neutral cannot remain for long
that if you have to get to 4% you will have to even go beyond neutral and get too hawkish?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : The Committee has also pointed out a couple of downside risks and we have also said that the
economic content of the incoming data will determine our future course. We are of course
aware of the risks on inflation and we have a medium -term target to achieve. So we will do
that, but we feel that at this juncture the shift from accommodative to neutral is adequate.
Thank you.