Mw&r 1994
SPEECH RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN
S. S. Tarapore
At the outset I would like to thank the
Rincipal of the Bankers' Training College for
giving me the opportunity of interacting with the
RBI nominee directors on the Boards of Public
Sector Banks. We have now entered Ule fourth
year of the reform process and a number of us
are asking the question as to whether the reform
is almost over; this is unfortunately not so and
rather like W.E. Bates 'The Pilgrim on the
Ganges', we have to keep moving on from one
reform to the next. I am sure that all of you are
familiar with the course of the reform and its
rauonale and it would, therefore, be useful to
discuss the issues at the frontiers, the tasks ahead
and the unflnlshed agenda and we should not be
disheartened if we do not have all the answers
to our doubts and fears. If we rake a quick
hindsight, nominee directors could scarce believe
that we would come so far in such a short period.
It was only a short while ago that we felt that
avoidance of automatic monetisation was a
mirage, that a market related system on
government borrowing would not be attained in
our working lives, that cleaning up of banks'
balance sheets would result in a banking crisis
and that deregulation of lending rates would have
disastrous consequences on the economy. None
of these fears have materialised. While we
should not hoist our own petard it is necessary
to note that the success of the Indian reform
process and its durability is attributable to the
measured step by step approach.
2. I would now like to get into the unch-ed
seas of the future financial sector reform process
and we should not be alarmed if we continue to
have fcars oad continue to be flummoxed by the
* Inaugural address by Deputy Governor, Sbri S.S.
Tarspore. b the Conbalm of Naminsa DIraotom of the
Resarve Bmk ob Iadi. on tbe Boards of Public Sactor Bfnlrs
at the Banken'Trahing Cc~Uepc,Bombay on Novambr
11,1994. myriad of problems. I do hope that this
Conference will provide a forum for a fruitful
discussion of some of these vexatious issues.
3. On the question of interest rate policy, there
is now a general consensus and a sudden
acclamation that we have arrived at the goal post
of lending rate deregulation. The question now
being raised is how the Central Bank would
provide signals to the market on interest rates. It
is argued that the Reserve Bank should provide
a reference rate of interest and it is sometimes
erroneously claimed that the Reserve Bank is not
allowing a BIBOR (a take off from LIBOR)
from developing! Nothing can bc farther from
the truth. The central issue is that a reference
rate cannot be merely anointed by the Reswve
Bank; to be effective it has to cam its place in
the market. Given the predominance of sector
specific export refinance, it is unlikely that the
Reserve Bank's refinance rate would emeage as
the reference rate. What is likely is that the
family of interest rates relating to Government
securities and liquidity support provided by the
Resewc Bank against the collateralisation of
these securities would provide the sheet anchor
for interest rates in the system.
4. While the co-operative banks' lending and
deposit rales have been deregulated, the deposit
rates of the commercial banks continue b be
regulated. The writing on the wall is clear and
deposit rates would sooner or later need to be
deregulated. The literature on deregulation of
interest rates provides that he deregulation of
deposit rates should be mdertaken at the end of
the process and at a time when inflation is
reasonably under control. It is also observed Ulat
when there is a total deregulation of intcrest
rates, inter se bank competition and bank and
non-hank onmpetltlon intensifies and results in a
shrinking of spreads between a fourth and a third. 1480 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLETIN November 1994
5. As you are all aware there has been a clear U~is will require banks to increase their efllcfency
shift in the emphasis of monetary policy from of operations. The system is still used to
direct to indirect instruments of nlonetary control clamouring for concessions. But the days of
which implies the emergence of open market providing concessions to weak and Inefficient
operations as a major tool of monetary control. units are clearly over and banks should reorient
With the rccent growth of primary liquidity, as thenlselves from a 'subvention' strategy to a
a result of the sharp increase in the foreign 'survival' strategy.
exchange reserves, it has been necessary to
undctlake large open markel operations. Such
operations ~~ecessarily imply changes in interest
rates and prices of securities. While lhe interest
rate diffcrenfials drive the capilal flows, the
dile~nnla is that open rrlarkct operations to ahscwb
liquidity widen Ulc wedge hetwcen domesric and
internaliorlal rates and could oncc again stimulate
capital flows. Banks will, therefore, have to
undertake their operations unrlcr a deregulated
interest rate rcgirnc wherein Ihcy will have the
freedom lo decide on their own lendingldeposil
rates, while monetary policy will impinge on the
level of interest rates in the economy. Thus,
hanks will have to develop the ~~cssary skills
to adjust rapidly to these changes.
6. Treasury operations are one of Ihc weakest
elements in the banking system and hanks would
be well advised to put their best personnel into
Treasury management. Thc advantage here is
that the numbcr of skilled personnel requird in
Treasury management is much less than in credit
management and banks can quickly develop
these skills. The present level of Treasury skills
is extremely poor anti tiominec directors would
be well advised to give attention lo this aspect.
Again. while asset-liahility management has
been given much lip service, poor asset-liability
management is hound to result in large losses for
hanks. As exacting prudential nortns are in place
and there is incrcasingly securitisation of debt,
there would he a relative slow down in
conventionally defined credit and an increase in
investments: thus in terms of a broader and more
meaningful concept of tlow of resources to the
commercial sector we should take a total view
of flow of resources.
7. In a deregulated regime, we must expect
the bankfnon-bank competition to intensify and 8. The interest rate deregulation leads straight
into the issue of the strong banWweak bank and
big bank/small bank argument and the need for
succour for the afflicted hanks. Since all of us
represent some type of bank, it would be useful
if this Sorum were to focus on what the overall
hanking strategy should be and within this how
individual hanks should respond to these
changes. At the cost of simplifying the issue, let
me outline the strategy that best suits each type
of bank. If a bank is a strong giant, it is best if
it concentrates on consolidation rather than
growth. It would be disastrous if such a bank
were to try and keep increasing its market share,
for if' it did, its lines of control will inevitably
weaken and with deterioration of loan policies
its NPA would deteriorate and ultimately affect
its profit line. Thus, such a bank should
concentrate on quality rather than quantity. In
contrast, if a small/medium sized bank is strong,
it would have a potential for growing faster than
the system and if it maintains or improves its
credit management then it could grow to an
optinturn size where its rate of return would
improve with well planned growth. For a
relatively small weak bank it would be best for
it to identify its areas of strength md the solution
could well be to concentrate on regions of
strength andfor slow down in areas where it is
weak and yet preponderant. While merges are
more easily said than done, they are not beyond
the realms of reality. The most difficult case Is
the weak giant which has wide geographic
spread, poor lines of coml and is too large to
be merged; in these cases a damage containment
appmach would be to drastically redua the pace
of growth of such banks. Ultimately in the
restructuring process we need to realise Ulat there
is no &us ex muchina which can easlly resolve November 1994 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA BULLElW 1481
hard problems. We should, therefore, not look
for gimmicks and subventions to resolve the
problem of such banks.
9. Before I conclude, 1 would like to briefly
touch upon the role of the RBI nominee director.
As you are no doubt aware, there is a viewpoint
expressed in the Narasimham Committee report
that there is a conflict of interest as the Reserve
Bank is a regulator and that the Reserve Bank
nominee director should no longer be on the
bank boards. Another view is that the RBI
nominee director plays a useful role and should
continue on the bank boards. There is much merit on both sides of the issue and it would be
necessary to carefully view the pros and cons.
While the role of the RBI nominee director in a
strongly regulated system was clear, the role in
a liberalised deregulated regime is less clear.
While it is important that the nominee director
should not he a supervisor, it is often difficult to
delineate the role of the RBI nominee as
supervisor and the RBI nominee as a member of
a bank board. My own personal preference is
that the RBI should not have a nominee on the
bank boards but this is a debatable issue and we
could usefully discuss this in the course of this
session. I wish your deliberations all success.