1
Edited transcript of the i nteraction of Finance Minister and RBI Governor with
media persons at New Delhi on February 14, 2022
Participants:
Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Hon’ble Finance Minister, Government of India
Dr. Bhagwat Kishanrao Karad, Minister of State for Finance, Government of India Shri Shaktikanta Das, Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Shaktikanta Das:
Good afternoon friends ! The Board meeting took slightly longer than we had anticipated. I
would like to welcome all the media representatives who have made it convenient to
participate in this interaction. E arlier today , we had the F inance Minister addressing the
members of the Central Board of RBI. This meeting is held every year as a part of
tradition.  It is an important component of economic and financial policy making in our
country because it demonstrates the importance and the necessity of fiscal and monetary
coordination in the overall interest of the economy . We had a very fruitful disc ussion
today with the participation of the F inance Minister and the Minister of S tate. We will
spend about 20 minutes or so in this press conference. T he floor is open now  for any
questions or any comments and I would like to start with Lakshman ji .
Lakshman Roy, CNBC Awaaz:
My question is regarding cryptocurrencies or digital currencies. Ma’am, in the b udget, the
taxation that you put on transactions in such currencies is conveying the message that
government may not impose a blanket ban on them. On the other hand, RBI Governor in
his post m onetary policy interaction had mentioned that they are a threat to financial
stability. So, are Finance Ministry and RBI on board on this issue? Or, are there any
discussions going on as to how to take them forward?
Nirmala Sitharaman:
RBI and Government are on board. Discussions are happening. Discussions happened
prior the budget and they continue even today  and will continue to happen. So whatever 2
decision the government takes or RBI takes  in the matter, the two wi ll be on board and
decide. And all decisions that have been taken on it, obviously because it is  a very
serious topic, it's about  a digital currency from the central bank of some sort , of some
shape, or  some colou r and some description,  so, obviously it will be with both of us
having had enough consultations .
Tarun Sharma, Zee Business:
On Saturday, February 12, 2022, CBI registered an FIR in respect of a big scam in this
country. There are some allegations that there has been a delay in the FIR. Till now we had been expecting that sufficient clean- up has happened in banks. Here, in the
presence of RBI Governor, we would want to know how much pain of this sort is still there in the banking sector. Because, from the point of view of leverage, we observe that
companies are at a sustainable stage. So, please give your views on this.
Nirmala Sitharaman:
First of all, this is actually an account , which became an NPA before January of 2014. In
fact November 2013 is when it was declared an NPA. After that,  because it's a
consortium of banks who have had a business with them , they have all sat together to
see how best any restructuring can be done,  which is a due process , which is done for
any account under stress . More so because it's a big account and also becoming an
NPA. So , that initiative was taken by the consortium . SBI  has been the lead. ICICI is the
other big bank which is exposed to this . All of them have sat together and started working
on it. So, from 2014 onwards this process is going on. Ho wever , overall , not just for this
account , in general , for any account and let us say details and the element of fraud or
any element of any kind of major letting down of banks almost takes 52 to 54 months to be done with all the intensive work that should happen. T herefore , when you're coming in
this particular case with that kind of a measurement , actually , I should say to the credit to
the banks that they've taken lesser than what is normally an average time to detect these
kind of frauds . Then, a forensic audit was d one and E rnst and Y oung or some group had
gone into the details everything else was collected and handed over to the CBI. I n 2020
and in 2022 CBI had fi led two cases . In the meanwhile,  the matter has also gone to the
NCLT  for resolution. N ow, normally it t akes around 54- 56 months and in this case it is  off
late taking far lesser time to detect such things . The long and short of all the  noise which
is coming out from outside is if it is a pre- 2013 case, and I’m sitting in RBI premises so I 3
don't want to talk  too much of politics , but, I'm sorry , the kind of noise which is coming up
is suggesting that  it is the biggest घोटाला  (scam) in Prime Minister Modi's time. N ot at all .
This was a loan given prior to 2013,  well prior to 2013,  that had become even an NPA by
2013. So, people did the dig holes into which they themselves fall . As it is said in Hindi
“अपने पैर पर क ु �ाड़ी  मारना”, that’s exactly what has happened here. T hey made the noise
not realizing that it was all then and we have taken lesser time to detect it and take
action. T wo cases in CBI  and referred to NCLT for a solution. S o, action is happening
here like the way it happened for every other major bank default . Of course Governor can
speak about it , but overall , banks ’ health has al l improved. T hey have done the turning
around. For hours they  have worked.  And, as a result , I can say that th e banks are at
such confident level today that they are able to raise even resources from the market .
Shaktikanta Das:
I think, Shishir Sinha wanted to ask. I will come to you all one by one, but quickly please.
Shishir Sinha, The Hindu Business Line:
Good afternoon S ir, good afternoon Ma’am. My question is that crude is now at 95 USD.
So do you think that the time has come to rework the whole inflation number because it's
gradually increasing day by day .
Shaktikanta Das:
When you do an  inflation projection,  you assume a certain crude price for the whole year .
A particular price,  and of course,  a range of prices . Today morning crude has touched 95
USD. I f you start calculating 95 dollars to a barrel , and, based on that make a projection
for 365 days , you will definitely go wrong because it may go up even further or it may
come down even steeply . So, therefore,  based on several factors , although I  am not
going into the details , we take into account a particular range within which the crude
prices are expected to fluctuate,  considering all the factors that can be anticipated and
that can be foreseen as  of today . So, you have to take a range of prices and do your
model ling within that to calculate what is likely to be the inflation during the year . You
have to always remember that you are doing a calculation for 365 days . The price was
around 70 dollars a few months ago, then it went to 80,  remained at 80-85 for quite some
time. So, therefore,  all possible scenarios within that particular range,  which we adopt in
our analytical models , we take a range of prices and within that we consider various 4
scenarios and make a projection. S o, at this point of time our inflation projections are
fairly  robust,  or, I would rather  say quite robust and we stand by it . If there is something
totally unforeseen,  which nobody can expect , that is different and we have said that it is
contingent on the risk . The downside or the upside risk to these projections is the crude
prices . But let me again assure at the cost of repeating we have assumed several
scenarios of crude prices and made our inflation forecast .
Deepshika, please.
Deepshikha Sikarwar, The Economic Times:
I have two questions - one to the Finance Minister and one to the G overnor . RBI
Governor after the monetary policy press conference said that crypto assets undermi ne
RBI’s  ability to maintain financial stability . Does bringing a tax and not just income tax ,
Government  is now proposing application of GST into such transactions, does it not force
the RBI to tie it’s hands ? Governor, is  the central bank comfortable with Government’s
move to impose tax on crypto transacti ons?
Nirmala Sitharaman:
Deeps hikha, when I answered the first question raised by Lakshman ji, I  made it clear
that whatever the G overnment does , we consult , have discussions with the RBI  and
thereafter, w e take a call. S o, if I were to tax 30 percent and then also to discuss GST
and everything else,  I would be tying RBI’s  hands if I  hadn't even talked with them , right!
So, the discussions which I  hold with RBI are done gradually and steadily , as we move
on, also taking the RBI  on board or keeping them informed and so on. S o, why would that
end up in tying the RBI’s hands? S o, I'll repeatedly appeal to all the media personnel
here that with the RBI  and the Finance Ministry,  not just on crypto but on every other
thing as well , in the last few years , which  you would have noticed too that there is
complete harmony with which we are working,  respecting each other's domain and also
knowing what we have to do with each other's priorities and in the interest of the nation.
There is no t urfing here that I  do something which might end up tying up RBI’s  hands.
Largely , I will request the media to observe what has been happening in the last few
years and I’m  sure it is easy to infer that there is a level of partnering with each other that
is happening.  So, you don't have to have that worry in your mind.
5
Shaktikanta Das:
And, since you address ed that question also to me,  may I just say that like several other
issues , this particular issue is internally under discussion between the RBI  and the
government . Whatever points we have,  we discuss with the G overnment . Beyond that  I
will not like to further elaborate.
Aftab, please. You wanted to ask a question.
Aftab Ahmed, Thomson Reuters:
Good afternoon Ma’am, good afternoon Sir ! I just had one question on inflation. Our
budget this year has been extremely growth focused and rightly so because we are
coming out of a pandemic , but we thought that RBI would indicate a more conservative
stance as far as inflation is concerned and that is how the budget , as a whole policy
making exercise,  this would be rounded off ; one focused on growth and the other
focused on inflation. W e didn't see that happening. W e just wanted to understand,  with
the risks building up in E urope,  with the situation in U kraine, B elarus , etc., how are we
planning to tackle inflation if it hits us very suddenly with the situation worsening over
there?
Shaktikanta Das:
I have said it in my post MPC statement that price stability is definitely uppermost in our
mind and pri ce stability basically means maintaining and adhering to the inflation target .
As it was explained in the post -policy conference by the D eputy Governor , the character
and the content of inflation in the advanced economies is different from the character and
content and the drivers of inflation in I ndia. A nd so far as I ndia is concerned , there is , in
fact, one interesting thing which we did point out in our post MPC press conference,
which I would like to repeat . If you look at the momentum of inflation right from last
October onwards , the momentum of inflation is on the downward slope.  It's primarily the
statistical reasons , the base effect , which has resulted in higher inflation,  especially in
quarter three and the same base effect will play in different ways in the coming months .
Today's inflation print will be announced at 5: 30pm  by the CSO.  I said it specifically in my
Monetary Policy Statement that today's inflation print is expected to be close to six
percent . So, that should not surprise or create any alarm because we have is taken that
into consideration. S o, therefore , as the growth picks up,  as we watch the inflation
dynamics , there is a delicate balancing between inflation and growth and the R eserve 6
Bank i s fully aware of its commitment to inflation,  keeping in mind the objective of growth.
This is precisely what the provision in the law requires or expects RBI  to do.
Siddhartha, please. We will be able to take two or three more questions.
Siddhartha, The Times of India:
How does the g overnment and RBI  plan to manage borrowing costs , especially when the
government's this year plan is a huge borrowing plan of 15 trillion r upees and especially
when there is pressure to raise rates ?
Shaktikanta Das:
In the post policy press c onference we have said that the cash and debt management
group,  which basically is a joint group between the D epartment of E conomic Affairs and
the Reserve Bank, they will be meeting during the month of March and they will come out
with a calendar of borrowing for the next year . In the R eserve Bank, I said this in the post
MPC press conference also that we are working on the  borrowing target and it's too early
for me to comment on the modalities of how we are going to deal with it . But we will deal
with it .
Dipankar please.
Dipankar Kumar, PTI:
Good afternoon Sir, good afternoon Ma’am! S ir, last year budget had announced
inclusion of G -Secs  in global indices . This year , the  government has announced the
launch of green bond. T he inclusion i s yet to take place rightly because of concerns
which are there in the minds of RBI. O n the green bond, I just wanted to understand
when can we see? W ill it happen in the next financial year or when can we see it? The
broad contours regarding green bonds c oming and what would be the quantum ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Regarding the inclusion in the global index , I think we have answered both the questions
in the post MPC  press conference. Inclusion in the global index is a process and last year
or year before last the FAR, i.e., F ully Accessible Route was introduced whereby certain
certain G-Secs are  fully accessible to the foreign investors . We are moving towards that .
It is a work in progress  so far as the inclusion in index is concerned. W ith regard to green
bond,  naturally , it's a budget announcement for 2022 -23, so the cash and debt 7
management group will meet next month and they will plan for it . The main rationale
behind going for green bonds is that world- over there are a lot of investors . There is a
whole lot  of investors who have dedicated funds to invest in green bonds . So basically ,
when you float a green bond which has a specified and a dedicated purpose , when you
float a green bond,  you are basically widening the participation of international investors
in the domestic bond market because there are a lot of funds internationally available ,
which are dedicated for investing in these green bonds . I think we will be in a position to
only take two more questions .
Yes, Nayantara please.
Nayantara Rai, ET Now:
Thank you so much! Sir,  just wanted to take off a little bit from what A ftab and S hishir Sir
had also asked, a bout inflation now being at a 40 year high,  which you have explained
also very nicely but the commentary coming in from the US-  do whatever it takes ,
emergency rate hikes - things like that . Then will we have to respond like that in I ndia as
well because the market s are jittery? Sir,  that's the question for you. A nd, Nirmala
Ma’am, because you're here,  if you can please throw light on the mega LIC  IPO, the
DRHP that has been filed? I  understand the markets of course are nervous but
everything is on track the government is not concerned about external conditions at all ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Now, so far as you said the markets are nervous . Now, you will see, and I think already
signs are visible-  we have tried to be as explicit as possible and to spell out all the details
in the way we are looking at M onetary Policy, the way we are looking at the emerging
inflation scenario. T he narrative is now slowly c hanging. T he analysis outside is getting
more nuanced. T here is greater quantum of analysis of each and every statement which
we made as a part of our MPC announcement. S o, we do expect the narrative outside to
slightly change. A nd the content of U.S.  inflation , as I said, is completely due to different
factors . For example,  you have issues of , for example,  labou r shortage in the U nited
States , you have wage increase in U nited States , which are primary drivers of inflation .
We don't see such things in I ndia. W ith regard to global spill -overs , it is again a very
important aspect and continuously we monitor the global developments and we are
prepared to deal with the global spill -overs . The strong forex reserves which we have,  8
about 632 billion of U.S. dollars of reserves , and also, I 'm not letting out a state secret ,
the quantum of forex which we hold in the forward market , if you add that , I think India is
well placed to deal with global spill -overs .
Nirmala Sitharaman:
Nayantara, you asked me about LIC. And, rightly you're cautioning me about what's
happening in the global situation , with Ukraine,  with the crude prices , fair decision,  and
so on? H ave I under stood you right ?
Nayantara Rai:
No, Ma’am. I wanted to get your comments on the LIC IPO.
Nirmala Sitharaman:
But in the context of these things , developing,  right? Am I right?
Nayantara Rai:
Yes, Ma’am .
Nirmala Sitharaman:
Only two days ago,  after I finished the b udget  speech, each day after I  finished the
budget and until two days ago,  the question that I was asked from the media is - “Hey, but
where is LIC? It’s not happening. M a'am , are you going to do it ?” And then,  at that time ,
the w orld was not very different from what it is today . Two days ago, U kraine didn't worry
you, crude pric es going up didn't worry you and you just said where is LIC? I  went by
Nayantara’s questioning and I  said- “Here, get going with it.” J okes apart , a big decision
like that is never taken as a knee- jerk reaction. It requires so many preparations , so
many board meetings , so m uch talking and complying with SEBI’s  requirements , and so
on. S o, it's done with consciousness and I  can see from after the announcement made,
although it  was a Sunday , announcement made yesterday and when SEBI had put it up
on their website,  this morning's reception,  not just through the media which is what you
all know about , there is a positive buzz in the air that the government has committed itself
and it's showing it . And, because of the way in which it has been tailored,  policy holders
are going to get a share,  retail investors are going to get a share and there's this biggest
IPO coming out . So, there is just an air of positivity which is so required when you're
doing some things with the stock market . So, lots of things can be creating tensions 9
outside but this development has kept itself very clearly and objectively looking at a very
positive development in the LIC’s history and that's what I 'd like to play  upon.
Shaktikanta Das:
Sapna Das there, please.
Sapna Das, CNBC TV18:
Thank you very much Governor and F inance Minister . A quick follow -up, Sir and Ma'am
on what has been said till now . Governor , you indicated that I ndia is more or less well
prepared to handle the taper tantrum , quote- unquote,  in case that unfolds in the way it
unfolded earlier . Ma'am you have also indicated something on those lines , so that's one
broader question. A nd second, Ma'am , would you be able to enlighten us in terms of how
much the G overnment would be able to garner from the com ing IPO though it may be a
bit early to ask that ?
Nirmala Sitharaman:
That's right , it's a bit too early to ask .
Sapna Das:
And on the taper tantrum?
Shaktikanta Das:
This time , I don't think there will be a tantrum because the U.S. Fed  is fully conscious of
what happened in 2013 and they have been giving sufficient advance guidance. N ow,
whether there will be three rate hikes or four rate hikes or five rate hikes , it's anybody's
guess . We will have to wait and as you go forward it will again depend on the inflation
dynamics , the growth dynamics also within U nited States . And let us also keep in mind
that the growth momentum in many of the advanced countries is slowing down,  that also
has to be kept in mind.
Shaktikanta Das:
The last ques tion we will take from Arup  there .
10
Arup Roychoudhary, Business Standard:
Good afternoon,  Madam M inister , Mr. Governor . Now, the Centre’s  point of view has
been that something like crypto no country can regulate along. T his will require a global
multinational effort . If I’m not mistaken, Ma’am, later this week is the G20 meeting of
Finance Ministers and G overnors , and in A pril, there is the World Bank- IMF meeting. S o,
what crypto regulation related topics will be discussed by yourself in those meetings ,
Ma'am ? And, secondly , this is a follow- up on ABG Shipyard.  Yes Ma'am , it was declared
NPA in 2013 but in 2014 they began a restructuring and when it failed,  again in 2016 they
converted into NPA,  backdated,  and then one auditor was uh appointed and then in
2019,  the first complaint went to CBI. I n that period from 2014 to 2019,  could some things
have been done differently to make sure that the situation did not reach here? T hese are
my questions .
Nirmala Sit haraman:
You can always have a benefit of hindsight and ask could it be handled differently and
also is a restructuring required at that stage? All that is there. T hat is part of how the
banking functions are taken up,  especially when you're dealing with a situation where you
probably can restore. I a m not suggesting anything about this particular thing. It's benefit
of hindsight , which tells you on 1st January 2014 you could have straight gone to CBI
itself, you may suggest that . But this is not for us to sit here and very quickly ask
questions based on all that we've read in newspapers or based on all that SBI  has
released in its press  note. T here are very serious -thinking professional banking people
who are sitting and looking at it . They're not doing it for anybody's sake. T hey're doing it
for proper professional conduct . So, I think we should allow that to have its full play , that
is one thing. On crypto , I've said that we are in the process of consultation. W hatever
decision the g overnment is going to take will be after the consultation. N ow, if you're
asking me,  therefore,  what I’m going to talk in G20, I  may not be able to tell you now .
Shaktikanta Das:
We will conclude now . I can see there are four or five hands. I know each one of you,  so,
it's very  difficult for me to discriminate but please excuse us , because we have really
overshot the time frame. T hank you very much for your participation. W e will have more
opportunities to interact in future. I can assure you I will come back a little later , not
today , but maybe a few weeks down the road to have an interaction with the media in
Delhi, specifically . Thank you!