“Reserve Bank of India Post Policy Conference Call
for Researchers and Analysts”
July 27, 2011
Page 1 of 20    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 2 of 20 Moderator: Ladies and gentlemen good day and welcome to the Reserve Bank of India post policy
conference call for researchers and analysts. As a reminder for the duration of this
conference, all participant lines will be in the listen-only mode and there will be an
opportunity for you to ask questions at the end of today’s presentation. To ask a question,
you may press * and 1 at any time during the conference call. Should you need assistance
during the conference call, please signal an operator by pressing * and then 0 on your
touchtone telephone. Please note that this conf erence is being recorded. I would now like to
hand the conference over to Ms. Alpana Killa wala from RBI. Thank you and over to you.
Alpana Killawala:  Thank you Melissa and welcome to all of you on behalf of Reserve Bank of India. Dr. Subir
Gokarn is chairing today’s conference and I wi ll hand it over straight to him, Dr. Gokarn.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Thank you Alpana, thank you Melissa. Good afte rnoon to all of you and let me welcome you
to this 7th I believe; in the sequence of post policy c onference call. As I am sure all of you
will agree this is very important part of our policy dissemination. We find it very useful as a
way to clarify and nuance some of the things th at we said in the policy and the actions that
we took and we also appreciate hearing from you the kinds of issues that the statements and actions have raised in your mind. I would like to apologise on behalf of Governor Dr.
Subbarao who had a meeting scheduled at short notic e for which he had to travel and so he is
unable to join us.
Let me begin by giving a very quick overview of what we did and why we did it and end
with a reiteration of our guidance and then we can open it up for questions. As you all know
by now, we raised the repo rate by 50 basis points which automatically raised the reverse
repo rate by 50 basis points and the marginal st anding facility rate, which is now the top end
of the  LAF  corridor, by 50 basis points. So the repo rate stands at 8%, the reverse repo at 7
and the marginal standing facility at 9.  Go ing by yesterday’s responses, both in the markets
and in the overall commentary, this move came as a surprise. Many people were expecting a
hike, but the weight of expectation was on 25 basis points. So I think it bears some
explanation as to why we chose to take a more aggressive stance. I thi nk we have to go back
to the May policy to place this decision in co ntext. When we look back at the inflation
trajectory over the last year and a bit going ba ck by perhaps to the first quarter of 2010-11,
there are two distinct phases and in fact this analysis has been very well documented in the macro and money developments where we looked at the changing  drivers of inflation; in fact
they have three phases there, but I will describe in terms of two.
Up to the end of 2010, the headline rate was certainly a problem. It was around 7-7.5 and
what we measure as core, which is the non -food manufacturing component, had started to
stabilise in the second half at around 5, came down little bit below that in a month, but otherwise around 5.1-5.2. This went on to about  November or December and in that context,
our approach was being validated - calibration as  an approach - to dealing with what were
clearly visible inflationary pressures, but at that point not ve ry strong ones, and we had over    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 3 of 20 the period starting March 2010 done roughly 50 basi s points and this was reinforced by the
shift in the call rate from the bottom of the corridor to the top. That was around 150 basis
points.
Now at the end of October, early November and from there, a new factor entered into the equation. We saw a very-very sharp increase in commodity prices. And this then translated into a very different and significantly higher trajectory for inflation starting early 2011. Now
we took stock of this; a number of other factor s that had to be taken into consideration -
whether this was going to be persistent or not, what the budget position would be, what the fiscal position would be post budget and so on. And after having taken all of this into
account, as we looked at the inflation traject ory, both in the early part of 2011 and going
ahead, we felt that it was a new situation. The combination of commodity prices and
persistently buoyant domestic demand was resulti ng in a much higher rate of inflation than
had been the case in the previous year and that was really the motivation for our May action
where we moved to 50 basis points hike from the previous cycle of 25. Now in our May
statement, we indicated a trajectory of inflation which basically said that it would remain
close to current level, which is around 9%, fo r some period of time and start to moderate
towards the second half of the year as a result of, among other things, the cumulative actions of monetary policy. Commodity pr ices were seen as a risk then, not just in terms of where
they were, but also the prospect of them rising further. So this was clearly an inflation risk
that we had factored into our calculations in the May policy statement. Three months later,
we have a somewhat different situation on co mmodity prices. There is of course a whole
series of global developments, but I will not get into those for lack of time; but on
commodity prices specifically, the pattern ha s changed somewhat. They are still high, but
there is not that much expectation that they will continue to harden further and that in the
sense gives us some relief looking ahead that th e pressure that they will exert on domestic
inflation will remain, but it is not likely to become worse.
The second factor that we have  taken into consideration is the state of domestic demands.
Now clearly interest rate hike s of over 400 basis points must start cutting into demand and
we are certainly seeing signs of that in all of  our discussions prior to the policy. The point
that was repeatedly made, was that banks are having difficulty in passing on more credit
particularly for new capital investment, consumer durables and real estate pointed to some
difficulty. All of these interest  rate-sensitive sectors suggested that rates had reached a point
which was beginning to impact  on demand. Now whether this in itself was enough for
transition to quickly bring inflation rates down from the demand side was a judgment that we
had to make. We did look very carefully at corp orate numbers both the full set of results for
Q4 and whatever early results we could get in time for the policy from Q1; and yes, there
were clear signs of moderation on margins, wi th projects where pricing power was coming
down. But it was not a very dramatic shift. So keeping the current rate of inflation in mind,
keeping the fact that the trajectory was likely to  remain at this level, 9 plus, for some period    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 4 of 20 of time, we felt that the best course of action  of course was to conti nue with the May stance,
which was to continue with the 50 basis point hike.
Now as we look ahead, how do we see this play ing out? Clearly we expect growth to slow
down somewhat as demand compre sses. Last year’s growth, as  estimated today, was 8.5%.
But there are some indications that this might be revised upwards. We have already started to
see some discussion of this in the public discourse partly because the new industrial
production series suggest that industrial growth  was somewhat higher over the course of the
year than previously thought. So actually moving  from 8.5 plus to around 8 to us reflects a
fairly significant deceleration or moderation in gr owth. That is the fact or that will start to
have an impact on inflation. The inflation numbe r itself, as we said, will start to come down
in around November-December. The cumulative impact of rate actions on demand will help
to do this and commodity prices may further reinforce this if they start to soften in that
period. But as I have said, we really do not ha ve any control and at this point, it would be
prudent to assume that they will remain in a somewhat hostile range going forward, but not
perhaps getting any worse.
As a result of this, we see inflation starting to , as it starts trend down, to move to 7% by
March end. Some people have i ndicated that it might be somewh at higher. I think what is
important is not so much the number at March end which is for us, a projection, but rather
that it is the beginning or it is a part of downw ard trajectory in inflation which of course if
we extended into the following year will continue to take the number down and that is the broad scenario with which we are entering this. When do we decide when the time is right to
review the stance and to change the stance? Esse ntially it is being driven as it said in the
guidance by these two factors; what is ha ppening to the commodity prices, what is
happening to domestic demand. As  both of these show signs of allowing inflation to start to
trend down, clearly that would be the right time  to review the stance. We think that this
process, this high inflation trajectory will co ntinue for the next few months and so as we
watch it, clearly our stance remains at this point anti-inflationary, but we believe also that we have a clear set of indicators to look at as we review it.
So let me stop with these brief opening rema rks, and we can open it up for Q&A now. I am
joined of course by all the deputy governors: Dr. Chakrabarty, Mr. Sinha, and Mr. Khan, by Executive Directors – Deepak Mohanty, Mr. Gan dhi and Mr. Mahapatra and the Head of the
Monetary Policy Division, Dr. Janakraj.
Alpana Killawala : Yes, Melissa. We will go with the questions.
Moderator:  Thank you. Ladies and gentle men we will now begin with the question and answer session.
Anyone who wishes to ask a question may press * and 1 on their touchtone telephone. If you wish to remove yourself from the question queu e, you may press * and 2. Participants are    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 5 of 20 requested to use handsets while asking a ques tion. The first question is from the line of
Mahrukh Adajania from Standard Chartered. Please go ahead.
Mahrukh Adajania:  Good afternoon. My question was on the priority  sector guidelines for banks. The May credit
policy did mention about revamp of these ex isting guidelines. So when can we expect
clarification on those?
Dr. KC Chakrabarty : Now you see; we have said that a committee will be constituted, but pending that the existing
guidelines continue, the committee is being appointed. It ma y be appointed in a week’s time
and the report is expected in four months’ time.
Mahrukh Adajania:  Okay, but there won’t be any change till the committee is appointed?
Dr. K C Chakrabarty : Absolutely
Dr. Subir Gokarn: It is not going to end with the committee’s appointment; it is going to end with its
recommendations being accepted.
Mahrukh Adajania:  Okay, thank you.
Moderator:  Thank you. The next question is from th e line of Kaushik Das from Deutsche Bank,
Mumbai. Please go ahead.
Kaushik Das:  Dr. Gokarn, you mentioned that the end March in flation projection that you gave,  is more of
a guidance rather than an end target and what is more important is the trajectory of inflation
and when it will come down and that will prob ably decide, let you decide, the change in
monetary policy stance. Regardi ng that, I was wondering, is it possible for RBI to give the
average WPI inflation for a financial year rather than just giving an end March target? And also, given the fact that you look at non-f ood manufactured goods inflation so closely and
that is the only proxy for core inflation. Is it at least possible to give an end March target for
core inflation as well?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Actually on the first question, you actually have it in the policy statement. We have not given
explicitly, but we have give n a monthly number on the fan chart. So you can actually
compute it. That should not stop us from giving it and we will consider that. On the second,
yes, I think that is work in progress. We do obvi ously forecast it internally , but we have to be
careful that we are not subject to significant errors in which case the guidance itself becomes
a little misleading, but implicit in our headline number which we have been traditionally
giving projections on, is also a core that is consistent with the trajectory. We do not publish
it, but it is clearly part of our internal analysis.
Kaushik Das : One more question which I had on the industrial production index and you have talked about
it earlier and the Governor has also talked about it that it is kind of gives faulty indications at    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 6 of 20 times. So how important is the industrial production growth number as far as your policy
decision is concerned as of today?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: It is one input out of several as I have said on other occasi ons, but perhaps not to this
audience; that we have 3 sets of inputs into our decision. We have the data and the models
and the forecasts that come from it. We have  a series of surveys including surveys of
companies. So this is an industrial outlook su rvey which we referred to in our MMD (Macro
and Monetary Developments doc ument) as well as the capacity utilisation survey, order book
inventory in capacity utilisation and now a cr edit conditions survey which is a survey of
bank officials and we have consu ltations with the whole range of stakeholders. So we try and
triangulate these inputs and try and arrive at a picture which is consistent or an inference
which is consistent with the largest number of indicators that  we get information on. The IIP
is an important one. We recognise that there ar e some limitations to it, but we do not reject it
entirely, but we see it in the context of what we are hearing and what we are seeing from
other indicators as well.
Kaushik Das:  Thank you.
Moderator:  Thank you. The next question is from the line of Shubhada Rao from YES Bank, Mumbai.
Please go ahead.
Shubhada Rao:  Thank you. Good afternoon everyone. I had act ually two questions. Th e first question was
regarding the core inflation trend of recent months. I think at these volatile times, the
incremental data assumed larger significance and what we have seen is a clear trend from Q4 of FY11 to Q1 - either month on month de-seas onalised or adjusted. We have seen a sharp
drop from one point for average in Q4 of FY11 to 0.4, month-over-month trend in core index
and even if you look at it seasonally adjusted, from 1.2, it has come sharply lower at 0.1. So
are we reading too much into this trend? And we did not see any comment on these latest
core inflation month-over-month sequential pa tterns from Reserve Bank of India in the
statement. So I would like to hear your thoughts on that one. The second was more an
academic question perhaps that when we are looking at incipient signs of moderation, the quantum of hikes seen in last 3 months of 125 bps, does it then carry a potential risk of
seeing growth going well below comfort levels? So it is essentially on the quantum, while
rate hike was in store, but the large dose of hike and amidst the m oderating cycle, does one
see some risks in growth spiralling lower, fa ster than anticipated? So these are the two
questions to the panel. Thank you.
Deepak Mohanty:  Shubhada, I think it is very difficult really to  derive substantive conclusion just looking at
what happened in Q1 of 2011-12. As you know th at one month of final data and two months
of provisional data and in the past that we ha ve seen substantial revision in the provisional
data. So what is happening there that you ca n see in April, the non-food manufacturing the
final data was 7 and the provision al itself has gone up to 7.2-7.3 and if really one compares    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 7 of 20 that with Q4 of 2010-11 where it gives an impression that the non-food manufacturing really
picked at 8.5% at end March. So if you add them together an extent, obviously it will show
you a pattern that is clear deceleration, but one is not too sure because it has to be taken with
some caution. If you are doing any kind of time series exercise, the end point data also creates a problem. So it will give a kind of a false number there as you can see that
momentum has come down. But if you see the pr ovisional itself over the final this year in
April, it is on the uptrend and let us hope that  it moderates because our assumption is some
moderation will take place, but what is the extent of moderation that we need to ascertain.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: The second question is important and as I have indicated in my opening remarks is that the
fact that there were some signs of moderation very much in evidence in our discussions with
stakeholders. So that did lead to the dilemma  of whether we should go for a stronger hike
versus the lower one. I think what really worked  in favour of a stronger hike was essentially
the robustness of several components of demand . Some of which have to do with the fact
that there is low interest-sensitivity there.  For example, the consumption is from all
indications, quite buoyant. Of course there ar e components of it which are interest-sensitive
and those seem to be showing some signs of  moderation, but otherwise there are no great
signs. Secondly there is, even with the ongoing fiscal consolidation process, still a very
significant contribution to dema nd coming from public expenditure which, as we know is the
result of the crisis response, is substantially higher today than it was before the crisis which
had seen a steady improvement in the fisc al situation. So t hose two components are
essentially quite robust. The fiscal situation ma y be adjusting, but it is still quite strong and
given that we felt that  the downside  risk to growth from interest rate  hikes would be fairly
bounded whereas the upside risks to inflation, pa rticularly a perception, that with a 9-9.5
number, the action was not being seen as adequa te. Of course, people l expected 25, but that
does not mean everybody thought that it was the right thing to do. They were predicting an
action, not making a judgment on what was opt imal. We thought that the stronger action was
essentially consistent with the new stance that we  had signalled in May. So there is of course
a downside risk to growth. We have pointed out  some of them in the document. We have
indicated the range where we think that grow th may go down to, but at the end of the day
there is also, we think a very strong lower bound on that risk whereas the inflation risk does
not unfortunately have an upward bound. It is unbounded in many ways and so we may have
to play the balance of risks in favour of going  little more aggressively against inflation.
Shubhada Rao: Thank you.
Moderator:  Thank you. The next question is from the lin e of Srinivas Varadarajan from Credit Suisse,
Singapore. Please go ahead.
Srinivas Varadarajan:  I would like to thank the panel for taking my questions. I have two que stions. The first one
goes as follows. If one looks at the inflation expectations survey that you publish every quarter, I have some numbers on this th e average one-year forward inflation over    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 8 of 20 expectations since September of 06 has been  close to around 9% and since October of 09
will be actually shifted policy. And this shifte d policy emphasises in this cycle, the average
one-year forward expectation is being close to about 11.5% and the last published number
for the period Jan to March one-year forward ex pectation is being 13%. The point that I try
to make is that there seems to be, you alluded to this, that there are fiscal offsets to monetary
policy action. The fiscal impulse  of the large advance tax refunds, the NREGA indexation or
the MSP and one is not of course taking into account an anticipated Food Security Act. The
point is that all these policies are welcome from a welfare perspective. They have a side effect in terms of keeping structural inflation and inflation expectations  high. Was this one of
the reasons for you to actually keep your gr owth forecast at 8% and upping your year-end
inflation forecast to 7% despite monetary po licy action of 475 basis points in this cycle and
also seems to be that expectations are not real ly sensitive to policy actions that have been
taken so far and that is this kind of point towa rds basically a wage price spiral, a significant
risk of that? That is the first question and th e second question is, what is the real rate in
India? If one takes, the SBI base rate of 9 quarter and one-year forward inflation expectations of 13%; then the real rate is still is about negative 375 basis points. How would you respond
to this?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: I think on the first question, we have to put a lo t of weight on the fact that this survey where
the 4000 odd respondents to the inflation expectat ions surveyed cut across a range of socio-
economic categories and there is a relativel y high weight or high proportion of people for
whom food is the largest single item of household expenditure by far. This is true of, daily-
waged labourers, self-employed people in formal  sector, kind of, and there is a relatively
small proportion of people who are white-collar professionals we could say. So the recent
experience with food does have an impact on inflation expectations.  I think that is playing a significant role in how these expectations are moving. So we certainly pay a lot of attention
to them in terms of directionality and wh ich is why the point I mentioned about the
movement from 11 something to 13 is important that it suggests that people are starting to see inflation rising, but not very much in terms of the actual number because that is really the
weighted outcome of the sample composition and so I think we have to put some caveats on
that. But the broader point about expectations and the possibility of this translating to wage demand, I think that is very relevant. If you have read the MMD, towards the end of the document, we have now introduced a discussion  on wage dynamics and it is very significant
because we obviously have very significant bargaining power in many labour market
segments which is translating into, you heard this anecdotally, but it is now showing up in
aggregate data as well, into very large wage increases. So the ability to index even in implicit
contracts, so informal market transactions is quite high and so high expectations does or
rising expectations do certainly enhance the risk of a spiral emerging. So if you recall one of
the statements made on the macro money developments document is that we need to focus
on dealing with this wage price dynamics. So  it is an important issue and dealing with
expectations even if they do not translate dire ctly into household, let us keep in mind that
wage is a two-sided contract whether the worker  asking for a wage and there is an employer    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 9 of 20 willing to give him one, both have to have similar expectations in terms of inflation for them
to be able to agree on mutually acceptable inflation premium. So if the employers feeling the
pinch as they have been talking about the po ssibility of moderation and so on, that premium
may not be forthcoming. So there is a counterva iling force on the other side of this. So even
if monetary policy is not showing up in indivi dual household expectations, it clearly has an
impact on what a potential employer is wil ling to pay given his assessment of business
prospects. So there is a transmission there.
In terms of the second question, I think I will re fer back to the issue that or the response to
the previous question which was that we do see not  so much directly or explicitly what you
said, but clearly that there is still a significant role that fiscal or public spending is playing on
demand and that it is not terribly interest-sensitive. So as long as that continues, the
adjustment is ongoing, the Ministry of Finan ce clearly has laid out a 3-year timeframe for
fiscal consolidation, but even as  this is ongoing, it is still pl aying a large role in demand and
that keeps pressure on demand up regardless of what monetary policy actions are taken. So
that, along with the few other such consideratio ns where we feel the demand is quite robust
for good reasons, for example, priv ate consumption spending, that is also part of the reason
why we decided to stay with the 8% and not take it down. These factors have also been taken
into consideration in the May policy so we di d not feel that there was adequate ground to
sharply bring that growth forecast down. But again I emphasise that we’ve given a range, 8%
is the mid point of that range. Deepak would like to add to this?
Deepak Mohanty : Just to supplement in terms of the inflation expectations survey, DG has clarified this again.
This is the household survey. Too much cannot be  read into as the time horizon increases to
one year down the line. Mostly what happens is that these are more adaptive expectations
and expectations formed by learning  and unless people see that the ground level prices
coming down, they do not change their expectat ion so much. And so going by that, I think a
useful thing to see is the current inflation an d three months down the line, so they are more
accurate in terms of validation, and in the subsequent kind of data we see that once inflation comes down, the one-year inflation expectation also coming down. I think the best way to
read this is that inflation expectations re main anchored, but they are quite relevant.
Srinivas Varadarajan:  And what about the question on the real rate? If I take the SBI base rate of 9 quarter and
again one-year forward inflation expectation of  13%, may be the 3-month forward is closer
to about...
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Again, I think we have to make a distinction between the effective rate of inflation for a person who is borrowing at the base rate. What is relevant rate of inflation for a business
person? Is it WPI as a whole, is that the core component of WPI, CPI… I think those are the
defining…real in… by taking two numbers that do not necessarily link up, I think it is not
appropriate. So if you take the WPI, then lending rates and deposit rates also are positive real
at this point. Policy rate clearly is not, but the lending and deposit rates are broadly there.    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 10 of 20 Srinivas Varadarajan:  Thank you.
Moderator:  Thank you. The next question is from the line of Manvinder Singh from International
Institution of Studies. Please go ahead.
Manvinder Singh:  My question to the panel is that the rise in the policy rates had created an arbitrage
opportunity through interest rate di fferential. So that will bring in the foreign inflow into the
country. Now what I wanted to know one thing is that the rise in the inflows will on one
hand lead to appreciation in exchange rate. First question is will RBI allow appreciation in
exchange rate or secondly will they allow incr ease in foreign exchange reserves to move up.
If RBI allows increased appreciation in exchange rate, so does RBI think that this will lead to
lowering down of imported inflation?
Dr. Sabir Gokarn:  On the first question, our polic y position is that we do not intervene in the forex market with
the objective of determining or setting the exchange rate. To the extent that we do intervene which we have not done a lot of for some time, it is essentially to react to very sharp
volatility and not with a rate determination in mind. So the exchange rate is essentially
market determined within the broad contours of  some capital controls which are on debt
flows. So if there is an inflow as a result of an interest rate arbitrage, but we are not seeing at this point a very large inflow, but if there is , then the default response would be to let the
currency appreciate; let the market determine what the exchange rate would be. So in that case, there is no significant accumulation of reserves. If the rupee does appreciate, yes, obviously, everything else remaining the same, there is a positive impact on inflation to the extent that imports become cheaper and this is also contractionary, in the sense that because
exports become less competitive, the aggreg ate demand goes down, so it helps to contain
demand and therefore bring inflation down. But, it is really a matter of magnitude and what
has happened over the last several months is th at the rate has been fairly variable, because
we have had capital inflows, but they  have not been very much larger than the current
account deficit. So there has not been very much change in the exchange rate overall. So as a hypothetical situation, yes, it would help to deal with appreciation, but reality is that even with a relatively open capital account at this point the rupee moves in tw o directions, it is not
moving distinctly in one direction.
Manvinder Singh : Sir, my second question is that if RBI says that there is huge demand, aggregate demand is
more than aggregate supply because of huge liquidity present in the economy do you not think instead of moving with 50 basis points rise  in repo and reverse repo rate, would it not
be good if something would have done on CRR front and repo and reverse repo would
have been raised by 25 basis points only?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Yeah, a very interesting point. I think we have to distinguish between the notion of
liquidity that you are referring to and the broa der sense that there is a sort of a large or
buoyant demand in the economy. When we talk  about liquidity, we are talking about the    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 11 of 20 resources available to the financial system on the basis of which they can expand credit. So
typically, banks would need liquidity to support its CRR, Cash Reserve Ratio. Now, in that
context, liquidity actually is in deficit and has been so consistently since the end of May
2010. Given that we do not see any significant benefit in using the CRR. Because what it will do, it will certainly tighten situation, but it could also disrupt the normal business
activity of banks because availability and cost of liquidity become unpredictable. So, since
we are in deficit already, the transmission from policy rates to actual lending rates is quite
strong. If you saw yesterday soon after polic y many banks announced at least I thought
two or three banks have announced that their ba se rate will be hike d also by roughly the
same 50 basis points. So transmi ssion is quite strong and that is the impact that we seek to
achieve.
Manvinder Singh : Thank you.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from the lin e of Devika Mendirat ta from Credit Suisse,
Singapore. Please go ahead.
Devika Mendiratta : Hi, good afternoon. Thank you so much for taking the question. My question relates to do
with the charts that you had on real interest rates in the quarterly macro publication released the day before. I totally take your point that let us not look at a particular value of
real interest rates right now, because which in flation rates should we use right now; but if
we like you got a chart there which is showi ng banks lending rates in real terms and you
have stated that using the WPI and what I found interesting was that starting 2000, the trend for that, is clearly been downwards. So  real rates have actually fallen starting 2000
pretty much consecutively. So if someone w ould look at that, some might say that real
rates seem to be low on a trend basis compared to historical trend, and hence stimulative. I
was wondering what your thoughts were on this please? Thank you.
Deepak Mohanty  Yeah, the various calculations that we have given there but you are absolutely right in
terms of trend that one looks at that there has been a secular decline in the real interest rate.
And if one really looks at suppose, we take the high growth phase of 2003-2008 by all
calculations the real  interest rate there could be in the range of around 5%, and obviously
we are quite lower than that at this stage. Of course, one factor that one would have to take
that more than a decade now the inflation rate also has remained very high for a couple of years now.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: I think it is important, Devika, to look at the structural changes and the financial changes
that have taken place over this period of time.  So I am not sure that the trend has an
indication of whether the policy is stimulatory or contractionary is that revealing. I think it
has to be seen over the course of the cycle. But over this period of time keep in mind that from 2000 onwards there have been very sign ificant changes in the financial sector
including I think the SLR being brought down - I don’t remember when, but it moved from    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 12 of 20 38 to 35 - some of that change was… then the small savings rate was brought down from
12 to 8, that is a very substantial change. So we have had a series of  deregulations in the
market, which have also clearly impacted on that  trend. So I think looking at the long-term
does not necessarily give you an indication of the state of our policy. It has to be I think
more appropriately se en over the cycle.
Devika Mendiratta : Right. Thanks.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from th e line of Peckwee Yeo from RBS Singapore.
Please go ahead.
Peckwee Yeo : Hi, good afternoon. Just a one quick question on where does RBI actually see estimate of
trend growth or potential growth of the economy?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: We now use the word ‘trend’ and not ‘poten tial’ because there is a bit of semantic
confusion in the public debate here. ‘Potential ’ is seen as an aspirational number, so we
prefer to use the word ‘trend.’ So our asse ssment which has been communicated in the
MMD (Macro and Monetary Development docum ent) which you may have had a chance
to look at is around 8%.
Peckwee Yeo : Right. This trend growth would be just for the fiscal year ending 2012, going beyond that,
is there a particular trend growth that RBI is looking at where you see as somewhat non-
inflationary?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: No, we are saying that business as usual, this is a trend which is essentially non-
inflationary, that is , if we can sustain this for some period of time, not just for this year,
but for some period of time without inflatio nary pressures becoming too acute. But, of
course, to raise it requires a bunch of other in vestments and we have repeatedly referred to
supply response concerns on food, on infras tructure. Now we are seeing pressure on
wages. So there is a human capital and skill i ssue, number of constraints that need to be
addressed to take the trend rate of growth higher, but in a business as usual scenario, clearly, just recent experience  would suggest that if the grow th rate is significantly higher
than 8 for some period of time we start to  see inflationary pressures becoming quite
significant. So that is the sort of broad perhaps a reasonable benchmark to work with.
Peckwee Yeo : Thank you.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from the lin e of Shishir Shindekar from BYK College of
Commerce, Nasik. Pl ease go ahead.
Shishir Shindekar : Thank you. Good afternoon, sir. Thanks for organising this event regularly. I am Shishir
Shindekar from Nasik.    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 13 of 20 Dr. Subir Gokarn: Hi, Shishir.
Shishir Shindekar : My question is what kind of correlation is observed between the repo rate and rate of
inflation in WPI as well as M3 and real GDP during the last three years, specifically from
2009 and how much time is normally require d for the transmission mechanism from
change in monetary variables su ch as repo rate to the change in real economy? Thank you,
sir.
Deepak Mohanty:  You would see that transmission were quite st rong in the money market because as soon as
the rates change, you see the money market rates adjusting that pretty quickly. It is a little slower into the debt market and then it goes into credit market. And of late,  we have seen
that  transmission to the credit market is al so quite good with the base rate system coming
in place, more or less corresponding increase es taking place in the lending rate. And
research would suggest that these are all pol icy instrument and they impact the ultimate
variables, growth and inflation, with a lag. So our assessment would suggest that
something between a year to 18 months. So that  is the kind of lags are there in terms of
policy instruments. But as you know, this lags  are variable and depends on the structure of
the economy, how it moves.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from the line of Varda Pande from Birla Mutual Fund,
Mumbai. Please go ahead.
Varda Pande : Hi, good afternoon. My question actually is to  do with the timing of aggression to clamp
down on inflation. The three tr iggers that were actually pointed out in the May 3 policy
were the fuel price hike expected, MSP hike expected and persistence of non-food
manufacturing inflation. Now, in terms of expe ctations, all these three counts scored very,
very high even during May, by the 10th of June may be we were through with two of them.
If we were to look at the non-food manufacturing inflation trajectory between February to
May it was well over 7%. That one concern play ed out. Fuel price hike was expected by
mid-June, it was done a little later, 24th, but the point being that all three triggers actually
came through before the June 16 mid-quarter. So  if really this kind of an aggression now
which was shown yesterday could have been shown in the June policy, may be expectations could have come off. So, wh y was the guidance for March ’12 number on
inflation not opt in  the June policy?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Keep in mind that the six weekly cyclical is a much less intense process. That when we do the mid-quarter which we now have been doing for I think five quarters we started in the
mid-quarter. We do not have the intensity of  process that we do for quarterly and I
describe this in previous response where we  draw on both data, model, forecast, company
numbers, company results, conversations, and su rveys that does not come to us at a six-
weekly frequency. So when we do a six-week ly review it is essentially based on data
releases. The two data release that come after the quarterly policy, th at is IIP numbers and    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 14 of 20 WPI numbers. But also we have the usual financia l data, credit, deposits and so on. So, it is
a little difficult, and this is of course a new process, is now getting entrenched to take what
might have been a sort of risky action on the basis of relatively limited inputs. So although
this does result in some difficulty, some cha llenges of communication, I think the choice in
June was to say, look may be we think the momentum is still there and our stance
continues, but let us not move as aggre ssively as we might on the basis of more
comprehensive set of inputs which we got in th e usual quarterly process. So it is really a
question of how much new information, how mu ch analysis we can do on that information
and therefore the ability to be a little more confident in the appropriateness of our decision.
Varda Pande : And so, if I understand it is more a reaction to , let us say procedural quarterly data inflow
instead of incrementally what we see on a daily basis?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: I am not sure I follow. What you are saying but th at is what sounds right that is it is based
on these two new sets, we have two months of  data coming in by the mid-quarter and we
are trying to see whether this reinforces our quarterly assessment or does it challenge us
somewhat.
Varda Pande : Right, all right thank you very much.
Moderator : Thank you the next question is from the line of Parul Saini from RBS Securities,
Singapore. Please go ahead.
Parul Saini : Good afternoon, thanks for taking my questi on. I have two questions actually. One is
regarding some core manufacturi ng inflation and I do realise you mentioned earlier that the
numbers for May and June were  provisional, so we should not put much faith in the
seasonally adjusted trend. It does show a significant deceleration versus a trend earlier in the calendar year. If you look going forward even if the seasonally adjusted trend was
within the RBI’s comfort zone of 4% to 5%, the year-over-year core manufacturing
inflation number would stay pretty high even through December around 7%. And given that you have said that the tightening stance  only comes off if core manufacturing inflation
goes down significantly, it might be helpful fo r us to know, as to what matrix you would
be looking at closely, would be at the year- over-year number because that will be impacted
by base affect and could stay high even if the seasonally adjusted number is coming off. And you also talked about corporate pricing power regarding core manufacturing inflation,
expectations and earlier results do suggest that there are a lot of margin compression
coming in, so some thought as to what do y ou think is appropriate margin compression
because some industrial companies have seen significant margin compression. So those two questions on the core manufacturing infl ation; and the second question is your
financial stability review points out  that higher interest rates ar e the more significant risk to
asset quality, at that even higher than the GDP  slowdown. Given these rate hikes that have    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 15 of 20 come through the system, do you think that you are significantly threatening asset quality
and it will be good to get your views on that. Thanks.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Well, on the first question, although we typi cally frame our policy statements on year-on-
year number, in our process we certainly review the month-on-month and now quarter-on-
quarter, the adjusted numbers as well to ge t a sense of momentum. As you would have
discovered, if you would  go back a few months, the significant upward revision in the
final numbers from the provisional have actua lly resulted in a very significant change in
the picture that one gets from this analysis. So  one has to view that with some degree and
if not that it is to be rejected, but it is something that we have to place in the overall dash board as one more input. But clearly if ther e is evidence of momentum dramatically
changing, you as well as the previous questioner have raised issues  about momentum and
something we are keeping track of, but, to  put it down to a number I think would be
difficult and perhaps not even very appropriate, I think it is really a question of whether the
pattern is consistent with what we are l ooking for. Now how is this number going to go
down? I mean it is going to go down because pricing power has gone down? It is going to go down because overall demand has gone down? So do we see consistency between the corporate numbers, between the production num bers, and the price numbers? If we see a
sort of everything or most things pointing r oughly in the same direction, I think that gives
us confidence that a trend is underway and we can base a decision on that. Again on
margin compression I would say the same thin g. Now we have made a statement in the
policy that we do not see very significant, there we will certainly see compression, but it is not very significant, that suggest that th is was early results, we had about 120-odd
companies on the Friday before the policy so, we analysed those. We will, by perhaps the middle of August, have the full set and the analysis done, to review what the margin
dynamics are, what the earnings dynamics are and that will be an input into both our mid-
quarter and going forward we will get the early results of Q2 in our October statement. So
it is an ongoing process and it is really the ch ange, the break in the pattern that we (are)
most keen to see - not really necessarily a numerical benchmar k. Keep in mind this is not
an established history here, these are all relatively new recent inputs coming into our
policy making process.
Parul Saini : Second question on interest rate?
Dr. K C Chakrabarty: Yeah, you see asset quality definite ly deteriorates with the rise in interest rates, but in the
financial stability report, what we are indicating is (that it is) not that interest rate (are) to
be brought down because the asset quality will otherwise deteriorate, we are only
cautioning the banks that their risk manageme nt, their monitoring system of the credit
quality has to be more vigorous so that because of  increase in the interest rate, if there is a
deterioration in asset quality, at least partly this risk can be mitigated. We are quite sure
that there is enough gap in the risk manageme nt practices, in the monitoring of the credit
quality, follow-up, recovery, So these efforts need to be accelerated . We cannot say that    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 16 of 20 because of the increase in the interest rate asset quality deteriorates and if the economy
requires to control the inflation, you want to increase the interest rate, this should not be
done. The purpose is different. Regarding financ ial stability this is more to warn the
system that what are the risk and what the action should be taken.
Parul Saini : Sure, just to clarify, given that you have expressedly said that you will wait for core
manufacturing inflation to come down sustaina bly, you would have a numeric number in
mind. So looking for Septem ber and October, let us  say the month-on-month
manufacturing inflation does come down, the ye ar-over-year numbers does stay high. But
we do see a demand slowdown and also margin being compressed further. Should we take
that as reasons enough that monetary policy stance will change?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Well, between now and then we have the September mid-quarter and we have an October
quarterly, so clearly we are indicating that we will give you appropriate guidance in those statements.
Parul Saini : Thank you.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from the line of Pradeep Mamak from Citibank, Mumbai.
Please go ahead.
Badri : Yeah.  My name is Badri from Citibank. A c ouple of specific questions  and specifically for
the coming quarter policy. The fi rst question is on growth guidan ce. I am not sure of what
is the percentage of interest sensitive sector s to overall GDP but if services and exports
continue to remain buoyant and your headline GDP is within your trend, then are you saying that you will be ignoring what’s happeni ng to interest sensitive sectors and continue
with your anti-inflationary stance? Second question is on inflation, you talked about
possible spike in food and fuel inflation in the coming months. Will your next policy
stance precisely be guided by non-food manufacturing inflation only? And my third
question is on fiscal. You talk ed quite a bit about fiscal issues. Have you considered
specific impact of your monetary actions a nd sacrificing growth in the near-term on the
immediate fiscal situation from the revenue side?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Well, on the first question in relation to the composition of output. No, I think if whatever
scenario you visualise for how that growth emerges, whatever composition of sectoral
activity drives it, if there is a significant decline in broad category of sectors, one should
somewhere fairly quickly see profits earnings coming down in that sector, of margins being compressed and also as a result of lower pricing power pricing coming down. So as
we are tracking the components or the contribut ors to inflation we should pick this up in
terms of the link between real activity and how it is translating to both corporate numbers
and actual inflation numbers. So I do not think we are looking at these numbers in
isolation. We are looking at them in terms of how they eventually reflect in terms of what    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 17 of 20 we are trying to do, which is to bring inflation down and what are going to be the drivers
of that process. The second question was with respect to a spike in, I did not quite get the
second question?
Badri : Yeah, I was talking about the food and fuel  price inflation could possibly go up due to
MSP and other reasons there, is  the next policy guidance action going to be precisely based
on NFM and not food and, fuel, etc.?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Clearly, the linkage between these first round sh ocks and the transmission into the larger
inflation process is going to drive our thinking. And sorry, the third one was –
Badri : On fiscal?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Oh, yeah, very important. At this point if you look at the tax buoyancy issue clearly the base for indirect taxes  is nominal GDP. So the actual mix of growth and inflation is not
that important if you are getting to the overa ll budget estimate of 14%, then I don’t think
there would be much shortfall on the indirect  taxes. On direct ta xes we may see some
compression because earnings are going down and that may have an impact, but there is
also an ongoing process of tax administrativ e improvements, better monitoring, better
collections and that may actually offset. So I do not think the growth in inflation numbers
we have on the table although they are curre ntly slightly differ ent from the Finance
Ministry, should have a direct bearing on this aspect. There may be ot her reasons for fiscal
slippage some of which we highlighted in the statements, but on a revenue accrual basis, I
do not think there is too much worry.
Badri : Thanks.
Moderator : Thank you.  The next question is from the line of Soumyajit Niyogi from SBI. Please go
ahead.
Soumyajit Niyogi : Yeah, good afternoon. This is Soumyajit Niy ogi from SBI DFHI. Dr. Gokarn, I would like
to ask you that in the last policy we have seen that the M3 growth has been reduced to
15.5% from 16%. Is it because of that in  spite of having low money supply we have
achieved deposit growth of 17.5%? So there is no more liquidity required. Or is it your
anti-inflationary stance that you would like to continue with  low money supply?
Deepak Mohanty : No, it is essentially because of the anti-inflationary stance because then you would have to
have control over the liquidity and alongside th at you would have seen also the credit
projection also we have…
Soumyajit Niyogi : And second thing is that since yield curve ha s flattened significantly but that there is no
sign of long-end curve has hardened significantl y. So can we say that the borrowing would
be mostly in the long end curve compared to short end? Because we have already    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 18 of 20 government announced that they will continue  with cash management bills and obviously
T-Bills will continue.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: Mr. Khan will address this question.
Mr. Khan : Cash management bills and short-term treasury bills are basically meant for short-term
capital mismatches. So they are not meant fo r long-term requirements of the government.
So far the long-term requirement is concerned we have a fairly well-distributed allocation
of securities with short-term, medium-term a nd long-term. Taking advantage of flattening
of the curve, our strategy has been to compar atively increase the size in the long-term. So
that strategy continues.
Soumyajit Niyogi : Okay, thank you.
Alpana Killawala:  Can we take last two questions, Mellissa?
Moderator : Sure.  The next question is from the lin e of Manish Wadhawa n from HSBC Mumbai.
Please go ahead.
Manish Wadhawan : Good afternoon. I would like to seek your vi ews on the trajectory of the monetary policy
tightening. Basically, the whole idea here  is, since 2009 when the monetary policy
tightening happened, we started with a non-d irect approach which was the SLR hike only
and then we have seen 25 basis points hi ke over 2010 and at this point of time in 2011
when there was concern regarding some kind of a slowdown or there were talks of
moderation of growth, we have gone ahead with  the 50 basis points in June and again 50
basis points yesterday in the policy.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: The 50 basis points was in May.
Manish Wadhawan : In May. Yeah. And in between there was a 25 basis points.If you could  throw some light,
the same factors existed in 2010 when we talk  of wage pressures or core inflation or
commodities firming up. What could you suggest? What has gone through?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: I think you have to look at in three phase s, right. Did you listen to my introductory
remark?
Manish Wadhwa : Yeah, sure.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: I was talking about the different trajectory th at inflation between 2010 and 2011. So that is
an important part of this explanation. But we  have to go back one step to look at the exit
from the prices also. If you are looking at wh ere we started this particular cycle of
tightening from, remember, that we did not st art from a normal situation, we started from a
very, very sort of desperate situation driven by the crisis. The effective call rate was 3.25%    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 19 of 20 when we started this process. So in 2010, there were two processes running in parallel
essentially. There was a correction process or normalisation process, and there was also a
bit of tightening which was reflecting the inflationary forces that we were seeing emerging
in the economy during that year. Now, to begin with, I would refer you to the discussion in the MMD on this. The first phase of  this inflationary process was driven by food. So at that
point, obviously, the view was that food prices are not going to be amenable to monetary
policy. But we need to deal with the expectati on issue. So we can justify tightening at that
point. There was normalisation and tightening goi ng on at the same time. It started to look
at phase two which is roughly July 2010 to  November-December 2010. Inflation actually
started moderating. Headline came out and so did core and what was contributing mainly
was non-food primary products were contributing there. So that was that. One phase which
sort of ended by end-2010. Now, in early 201 1, the new shock, commodity prices as a
shock factor in 2010, they were rising but th ey were not so significant. Today, commodity
prices even after some softening in the last few weeks are still about 30% higher than they were a year ago. So that was a completely different inflation trajectory emerging in the early part of 2011 and that is what we have  been responding to with the more aggressive
actions now. So I do not think one should see th is as logically a continuous cycle. There
have been two distinct breaks in the cycle; one is the normalisation and two is the more
recent shock in terms of the global commodity price factor.
Manish Wadhawan : Appreciate it. Thank you very much.
Moderator : Thank you. The last question is from the line of Shubra Mittal from Kotak Mahindra,
Mumbai. Please go ahead.
Shubra Mittal : Good afternoon. My question really is that we have been talking right now with the
assumption of a normal monsoon. I was just wondering that in case monsoon were to fail
then it would have implications  for both growth and inflation with  upside risk to inflation
materialising and  downside risk to  growth  also materialising simultaneously. In that
situation, what possibly could be the stance of the RBI?
Dr. Subir Gokarn: For the moment, since we do find from analysis that rainfall in July is really the critical monsoon risk. And July has been 99% so fa r over the country, and we have a production
weighted index, food production weighted i ndex, which is looking at a 104 or so. So,
slightly above normal. So the ri sk has significantly actually ab ated now. There is some risk
in August. But if July were to be a failure then your question would have gained a lot of significance. But we have some comfort fro m the July numbers and if August becomes
inadequate, yes some crops will be affected and we will obviously have to take that into
consideration. But for the moment, the monsoon risk is somewhat less significant. I would
say significantly less, significant than it was when we went to our May cycle because we
had no idea of how the temporal distribution of rainfall would be. But the July
performance has been very reassuring, it is mo re or less nationwide and with this food    Reserve Bank of India
July 27, 2011
Page 20 of 20 grain production weighted index we do not see very serious stresses emerging on food.
There are structural issues which we have been talking about impacting food prices, but
the added burden of a bad monsoon is unl ikely to be part of the story now.
Shubra Mittal : Thank you.
Dr. Subir Gokarn: We are going to bring this to a close now. Th ank you all for participating. We appreciate
the questions that were asked and we hope th at people who did not get a chance to ask
questions benefitted from listening to both, the questions and the responses. Our next
conference would be post the Oc tober policy, although that is  a Diwali day, immediately
after policy, so we may have to tweak schedule  a little bit, but we look forward to being in
touch with you again at that point through th is format and certainly in other ways in
another event. Thank you very mu ch for listening and all the best.
Moderator : Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India that concludes
this conference call. Thank you for joining us and you may now disconnect your lines.