Page 1 of 11
“Reserve Bank of India Post Policy Conference Call for
Researchers and Analysts”
August 6 , 2014
PARTICIPANTS FROM RBI:
DR. RAGHURAM G. RAJAN – GOVERNOR
SHRI H. R. KHAN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. URJIT PATEL – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
SHRI R GANDHI  –DEPUTY  GOVERNOR
SHRI  S. S. MUNDRA –DEPUTY  GOVERNOR
SHRI DEEPAK MOHANTY , EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
MODERATOR : ALPANA KILLAWALA – PRINCIPAL CHIEF  GENERAL MANAGER   Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 2 of 11 Moderator : Ladies and Gentlemen , good day and welcome to the Reserve Bank of India Post Policy
Conference Call for Researchers and Analysts . As a reminder , all participant lines will be in the
listen -only mode. There will be an opportunity for you to ask questions after the presentation
concludes. Should you need assistance during the conference , please signal an operator by
pressing ‘*’ then ‘0’ on your touchtone telephone. Please note that this conference is being
recorded. I now hand the conference over to Ms. Alpana Killawala. Thank you , and over to
you, Ma’am.
Alpana Killawala : Thank you , Inba and good morning to everyone in this Post Policy Teleconference for
Researchers and Analysts . The Governor along with all the Deputy Governors and Executive
Directors is here.  I will straightaway go to the questions.  We have received th ese in advance on
the net .
Kaushik Das :                       Kaushik Das , Deutsche Bank . How many months does it take for a 25 bps cut to trans mit into
the real economy , in RBI ’s view ?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : Our work  indicates that the transmission lags are of the order of 3 to 4 quarters , and it  is a bit
faster on the inflation side and possibly a bit slower on the real side depending on where we are
in the interest rate cycle , but these things need not be constant a ll the time but as reported in our
work a fair number of times , this is of the order of three to four quarters , give or take.
Kaushik Das:  Does RBI consider  unsterili sed FX intervention as a tool to improve domestic liquidity?”
Dr. Raghuram  Rajan : I do not think so , I do not think we manage liquidity through the foreign exchange markets ,
sometimes there may be situations where we can temporarily take advantage of any
interventions we have undertaken to alter the liquidity position take delivery or postpone
delivery given the liquidity situation but it  is not a long -term or a tool which we rely on , it is
more an opportunistic tool that sometimes comes into play.
Naveen Sharma : Naveen Sharma , HDFC Life Insurance Company . Governor in July 2013 , while assuming the
office you mentioned that RBI would look to find new buyers for Indian sovereign bonds so
that it can reduce banks ’ SLR. However , RBI seems reluctant to increase FII limits in G-Sec
and it seems talks on pushing Indian bonds ’ inclusion in benchmark ind ices have not moved
forward . There is some contradiction, request you to please help us understand this .
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : No, I think the assumption in the question is th at only new buyers will be foreign institution s or
investors . We have other sources  of buying for government bonds , and I think as the Indian
markets develop more domestic institutionary investors  – pension funds, insurance companies  –
will start looking at redeploying more of their funds in India n bond markets. We have to
facilitate the  way for Indian retail investors also to get in . Furthermore , I think when we look at  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 3 of 11 some of the actions we have taken such as these SLR cuts , people assume automatically that
when we cut SLR , banks will no longer be clients for government bonds , and that  is not
necessarily true . It essentially gives them the flexibility of choice when that choice has to be
made . But I think for the foreseeable future we will probably see some excess investment in
SLR. So whatever we  are doing is in a measured way , we are interested in foreign institutional
investors coming into the markets . I had for example , discussions with long -term investors,
government investment companies over the last few days who are starting to see some interest
in government bond markets , and we are open to an increased presence . But when we are
talking about external debt , we have to be careful about the pace at which we do it and what
maturities and so on. We I think at this point are fairly comfortable with the fact that there is
room in the G-Sec market for more investment fr om foreign investors, we are also comfortable
with the maturity at which they are coming in incrementally , it is at the 3 -year plus range and
that is a pretty decent level for us to be at . And going forward if those limits fill up , we will
certainly examine the possibility of increasing it . We are not in any way against changing it ; we
just are doing it at a better pace. Finally , we are exploring the possibility of trying to get various
systems like Euro clear or Clearstream engaged in India. The important issue we have to
consider is whether liquidity stays in India or goes somewhere else , and in order to facilitate the
deepening of the bond markets in India , we are looking for finding ways that trading occurs in
India rather  than elsewhere.
Gautam Singh : Gautam Singh , Spark Capital . The expectations that Fed  could raise interest rates sooner than
expected led to  around  2% depreciation in the rupee in last one month . Assuming inflationary
pressures continue to ease more than t he RBI’s expectations what would be your s tance  on the
monetary polic y when  the Fed actually starts raising the rates? How would the Fed’s rates
tightening cycle impact the RBI’s monetary policy decisions?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : This is what one would call a really hypothetical question because I think Fed raising rates is
still someway off and the Fed keeps insisting every time when  the question is directly put - that
its further off than you think. Nevertheless, i t is a legitimate question in the sense that w ould
we be driven by interest differentials with other countries in determining the domestic interest
rate. My sense is that for the most part we would be driven by domestic conditions rather than
external conditions in determining the interest rate . Which  is precisely why we are fighting
very hard to build inflation credibility, because I think once you get some inflation credibility it
gives you a certain amount of flexibility in focusing on domestic conditions rather than trying
to act kneejerk towards e xternal developments.  So a combination of macro -stabili sation of
which inflation credibility is an important component , I think will give us much more room as
and when the Fed tightening happens. You want to add to something , Urjit?
Dr. Urjit R. Patel:  Only to paraphrase what the Governor said yesterday , that it  is very difficult to predict the
outcomes of what the Fed actions will be . If you recall that when taper talk first started , US  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 4 of 11 rates were 30 to 40 basis points higher than what they are now and the y continue to be at the
rates that they are now which is 30 to 40 basis points lower even after the talk on the interest
rate hike has gathered some momentum . So it is difficult to predict how much of what has been
said by the Fed and what the data says , has already been brought into the information set of the
players on the bond markets . And therefore I think it  is not very constructive to speculate on
what we would do if and when these things happen.
Bekxy Kuriakose : Bekxy Kuriakose , Principal Mutual Fund . What is the RBI’s thought process  in announcing
multiple price led G-Sec auctions recently ? Does this indicate discomfort with current rates of
on-the-run securit ies?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : I think this is one situation where too much is being read into a m ove. Let me explain what
happened . Before the volatility we experienced last year , the RBI was on a multiple price
auction system , and there was a feeling here when the volatility occurred that perhaps investors
may be more comfortable with the uniform pri ce even though that may lead to perhaps more
muted participation and it may also allow to some extent a less efficient , from our perspective ,
auction outcome . So we moved to that. Now , there is a lot of debate on which system is better
multiple price or un iform price . And across the world you have some central banks on the
uniform price , some central banks on the multiple price . The feeling here was that we could go
to uniform price while the volatility was on , and as the volatility has come down we have be en
moving back to many of the pre -volatility measures we had . So, for example on the foreign
outflows we took a step to move back towards what we had earlier , which is allowing
households to send out more money than they could in a period of volatility . So we have been
reversing many of these measures and this was one of the measures we reversed. There has
been a lot read into this , because it accompanied the new bonds that came in  - the 10 -year
bonds . So I do  not think you should read too much into it . We are just going back to a system
we had before the volatility ; that was a system that was preferred here. Of course , the legitimate
question is which system is really better , which helps us create a more liquid market , which
helps investors invest more effe ctively ? And as I said the world is split on this , we have to do is
more research domestically to look at which system is better and that research is ongoing . So
next time we make a shift we will make sure if it occurs , and I am not saying it is going to
occur, but if our research indicates some great advantage to one system or the other , we will
make sure that we communicate it much more widely before any such shift happens.
Bekxy Kuriakose : The credit -deposit data as per the Reserve Bank’s  Weekly  Statisti cal Supplement released for
the period ended July  11, 2014 shows a significant pick -up in deposits and fall in outstanding
credit . Given this, isn’t the SLR cut again within a span of two months premature?”
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Let me take the piece on the SLR cut and then ask Urjit to take the question on pick up in
deposits and the fall in outstanding credits. First , people say on the one hand your SLR cut is  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 5 of 11 not going to have much effect because credit pick up is still very dormant, banks are  not going
to use the space to make loans and that  is certainly true given the stage we are at. On the other
hand , they say “Oh! The SLR cut will large effects in the bond markets .” The two statements
do not go together. If banks are not going to increase credit they a re going to stay with their
current allocations to the bond markets and this will have limited effect . In fact that is our belief
that at this time when credit is relatively muted we are not creating too much volatility in any
market , either in the credit market or in the bond markets by doing some of these SLR cuts .
And that gives banks the ability to anticipate ,  gives the bond markets the ability to anticipate as
and when credit picks up , and therefore price movements would be somewhat smoother than
they would be  if we  did this in the middle of heavy credit season. Now that said I do  not think
the implication you should take away from this is its going to be 50 basis points every
monetary policy meeting . These were two cuts we made because we thought the re was room,
going forward we will investigate the conditions in both , the credit markets as well as the bond
markets and make appropriate decisions at that point. The broader longer term  and  by long
term I am talking about 5 -year program , is that we shou ld reduce the amount of preemptions
we have in the system including SLR and make a more effective priority sector lending
process . We have a committee looking at priority sector lending to make it more effective , but
these are necessary changes in the syst em and should  not be seen as tied to the monetary cycle.
Urjit.
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : Just to add one bit on the SLR cut I think that we concentrate a  fair bit on the aggregate SLR
holding by the banking system . But the changes in the SLR also help or help t he banks that are
at 23% much more , and therefore if those banks need the elbow room to lend more , then they
have that all elbow room . While your observation on the SLR holdings at the aggregate level is
correct , so actually it  is not a policy cut that eff ects the entire banking system in the same way .
The banks that have the elbow room and have the demand for credit will obviously benefit , that
is part of the motivation. Credit depends on demand and the fortnightly numbers are fairly
volatile, the year -on-year is still lower , and what we are doing is creating the enabling
conditions so that supply is not a constraint when credit picks up as we envisage . Firstly , as we
move towards the busier end of the fiscal year in this regard  and secondly as some of the supply
constraints and the government conditionalities and clearances come through for the larger
projects , we are hopeful that credit will pick up then.
A. Prasanna : A. Prasanna , ICICI Securities . My question is on RBI’s balance sheet and G -Sec holdings .
Does the RBI have a policy regarding the reinvestment of maturing G-Secs in its portfolio , and
will such policy be placed in the public  domain ? More generally , is the RBI contemplating
providing more information about the comp osition  of its G-Sec holding s?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Let me ask Mr. Khan to answer this.   Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 6 of 11 Shri H.  R. Khan : Policy of reinvesting the maturing G-Sec per se,  the G-Secs we are holding , whenever we do
OMO operations , and th e OMO operations are linked with our liquidity assessment . So there i s
no such policy as I mentioned. On the s econd question, we do publish how much is the G-Sec
and how is the oil bond so that composition is available in our balance sheet , so that breakup is
available.
A. Prasanna : My second question is on the H TM classifi cation;  currently the H TM limit is higher than SLR
by 2% . Over the medium -term does the RBI intend to bridge this gap or is there a preference
for maintaining higher ceiling  on H TM compared to SLR requirements?
Shri H. R. Khan:  As we mentioned we had la id out a roadmap last time  of reducing the H TM proportion  in a
phased manner.  But immediately after that last year we had huge  volatility in the market so we
had to put a pause to that . So again since we have found some stability and we need to further
improv e the liquidity in the market , we have started moving the process . But in what  exact
measured pace we will do , will depend on how th ings pan out.
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Absolutely , I think the message to take away from these moves is not that it  is part of a steady
every policy meeting measure . It is more that when there are opportunities to reduce some of
these constraints , I would emphasi se on the banking system and allow for a freer market , we
will take them , but there is no predetermined path in any which way.
M. J. Raghavan : M. J. Raghavan , SBI Life Insurance . Why did the RBI l eave out the words of J une policy
document, “ On the other hand if disinflation , adjusting for base effect s,  is faster than currently
anticipated , it will provide headroom for easing  of policy stance ” from the August policy
statement ? So is it that the RBI will react to a faster than expected disinflation in a different
way now as compared to what it felt in June 2014?”
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : No, I do not think so , I think the reason we left it out is the statement seems to have been
misinterpreted by the market. Let me read out the first part of that statement in June, “If the
economy stays on this course further policy tightening will not be warranted .” That is if it stays
on the course  we wo uld no t tighten , but if it does not stay on the course we will tighten . I think
that is how you read that first sentence. Second sentence is if it disinflates faster we will be
more accommodative , if it does  not disinflate faster we will not be more accommodative. I
think it was a two -way statement which was conditional on developments on inflation. The
market seems to have misinterpreted it first as a n unbalanced statement because it thought the
second phrase was more pointed than the first phrase . And I can see how that misunderstanding
and I have to emphasi se, it was some players in the market rather than the market uniformly
because a number of players understood what we were saying . But some player s seem to think
that it meant a bias , and there wa s no intent of bias , it was a conditional statement and
conditionalities can happen on both sides. We thought that we were on the path which we still
reiterate . So in that sense the policy statement has not and the policy actions that are intended  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 7 of 11 conditio nal on developments have not changed since June. I think what is different in this
policy statement is that we are closer to the end of the year and therefore we have also
emphasi sed that we have to be thinking about the next phase of the target which is r eaching
6%. But in our willingness to be acting on either side depending on developments - that has not
changed.
Siddhartha Bhotika : Siddhartha Bhotika  from Aviva Life Insurance . When we talk about upside risk,  the 6% CPI
target for Jan 2016 , would it not be fair to construe that policy rates need to be higher (at
current assessment , that is ) to ensure those risks are roughly balanced ? Is the repo rate
endogenous or exogenous when we make these  fan chart  projections ?
Dr. Raghuram  Rajan : Let me ask Urjit to  answer.
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : If you look at the 6% CPI target rate , at the moment we feel that where we are is in line with
the glide path that has been guiding our policy since January . But of course as the policy also
makes clear , that the incoming data over the next few months , correcting for base effects and
other seasonalities will inform the policies going forward . And that  is why both the previous
policy statement and this one has emphasi sed the balance of risk s on both sides of that number.
Samiran Chakraborty : Samiran Chakraborty , Standard Chartered Bank . Are you comfortable with the flat /inverted
yield curve continuing for a prolonged period ? If not, how do you plan to normali se it?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Our ability to act on the long end of the mar ket is very , very limited . All we can do is ensure
that there is adequate liquidity , adequate demand /supply or whatever . But really we cannot
really move prices at the long end . What we can do of course is at the short end through the
policy rate . So the y ield curve is going to be what it is and I do  not think we are going to act
actively on creating a yield curve . It does of course reflect a variety of issues including demand
and supply , including the path of developments in the economy and the anticipated  policy
reaction that will happen when that path evolves . So I think we are not going to try and affect
that. Of course central banks in western countries where there is a certain amount of inflation
credibility have tried to guide that through forward gui dance and perhaps quantitative easing . I
suspect that the effect is more limited than most people conclude .
Saugata Bhattacharya : Saugata Bhattacharya , Axis Bank . India is hopefully entering into a growth upcycle . Rarely has
monetary policy been eased , particularly rates cut,  during such a phase . What combination of
inflation, growth, currency , and financial savings might allow policy easing in the month
ahead , if indication s are that CPI inflation might sustain around 6% ? Will there even be a need
for easi ng?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Our first objective is to ensure that the economy disinflates according to the path that we have
laid out . If we believe that the path of disinflation will be faster than what we have laid out ,  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 8 of 11 certainly , there is a room for easing.  We laid out this path because we thought it is something
that we can achieve and consistent with reasonable rates of growth. If the economy shows signs
of doing it faster , there is no reason why we should  not be in a position to cut rates in order to
may be have somewhat faster growth , again consistent with the targets we have laid out. On the
other hand , if things look much tougher on the inflationary front , we are prepared to raise rates ,
if need be. Now , as I said again , it is a two -way statement . Our sense is the risks are balanced ,
but we have to see because it depends on a number of issues which are uncertain at this point ,
for example , the monsoon, for example , the government actions ,  a number of which have been
promised , some have been undertaken . So a number of things have to happen . And of course
every economy is a complex animal , and we have to see how it behaves.
Kumar Rachapudi:  Kumar Rachapudi , ANZ Bank . To help us estimate the total systematic liquidity deficit , would
it be possible to give a n estimate of governm ent cash balances with the RBI?
Shri H. R.  Khan : On Government cash balances we have been in discussion with government whether they can
release the figure . But as of now they have some reservations about releasing the figures , so
that is the constraint . But we are in discussion with government about auctioning the ir balances .
So if and when that happens that will give an indication how much balance they are giving . But
the other important point here is that we are in dialogue with gove rnment to see that there is
some information available to RBI on a real -time basis about how the balances are fluctuating
so that we can modulate our liquidity management.
Dr. Raghuram Rajan : Let me also add at this point that on liquidity management , we h ave said in the policy that we
would review liquidity management , and the idea is that we will examine some of the reasons
for volatility , and our intention is not to foster more volatility . Some of it is unavoidable ,
because of fluctuations in balances an d demand for cash , but we have to try and smooth that
process . Our intent is to keep the call money rate close to the policy rate , and we will come out
very shortly with any measures that we think might be necessary to further this process, we are
examinin g what is required.
Dr. Urjit R. Patel : Something that we had mentioned at the press conference yesterday also , that call market
volumes have actually come down by about 40% and therefore when you have a thin market
you are going to have some volatility . Therefore, I think if you look at some of the other
attributes that affect this market . For example , if we have a weighted average call rate or we
look at the term repo auction spread , the utili sation of LAF and ECR to required reserves , the
number of banks  that are participating in this - I think that whole gamut needs to be looked at to
determine the condition of liquidity in this market , where volumes are now lower by  Rs.16,000
to Rs.10,000 crore.
Alpana Killawala : Would you like to take some direct questi ons Sir?   Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 9 of 11 Dr. Raghuram  Rajan : We can take a couple of questions if anybody has questions after these that we have answered.
Moderator : Ladies and Gentlemen , if you wish to ask a question at this time you may press ‘*’ and ‘1’ on
your touchtone telephone. Our first question is from Srinivas V aradarajan of Deutsche Bank.
Please go ahead.
Srinivas V aradarajan : Sir, just two questions . In your inflation targeting framework what element of the central
bank’s reaction function is driven by a monetary policy rul e like a Taylor  rule and what
proportion of it would actually be discretionary? The second question really relates to the
household inflation expectations survey that you released yesterday . If one looks at these
numbers , the 3-month forward expectations h ave actually gone up to about 14% and the 1 -year
is at about 15% . Now if the economy actually begins to disinflat e as you envisage but if
inflation expectations continue to be sticky , and they have  been sticky and rising for the last 4 -
years , and if they c ontinue to exhibit that behavior in the back drop of labile food and primary
article prices , how would the reaction function actually change?
Dr. Raghuram  Rajan : The first, while we have a glide path in mind, I would not say we are currently in an inflati on
targeting framework, but we have many of the elements in place. That said, I think we do look
at what kind of policy would be consistent with a Taylor  rule. But remember,  Taylor  rule is just
an empirical statement based on behaviour  of some other centra l banks, and we cannot be
guided solely by that at this point. There are structural forces changing in the Indian economy,
there are shock s which would not exist in other economies. So while it is a mistake often to say
that the Indian economy is so genero us on this, we have to be a little careful that we do not
simply take experiences elsewhere and translate immediately. But, we are working with
models . We are trying to see what would be appropriate interest rates given the kind of
sensitivity of the econo my to interest rates in the past , of course  the economy itself is changing .
So this is not - here is what the model says, here is where we have to go kind of proce ss at this
point. Over time, we hope to move towards a more analytical model -driven process, but we are
not there yet. The economy has disinflated considerably if you look at headline inflation since
November. Too early to claim victory by any means, we are not claiming any kind of victory ,
but there is a process of disinflation. That has not show n up as yet in inflationary expectations
in a significant way .And of course, one could argue that people still believe expectations are
really high or we could say that maybe we have to be a little careful about what the surveys tell
us. I would say that p erhaps being careful about what the surveys tell us is perhaps where we
should be. When we look at the surveys we find a significant number of people expect inflation
to be above 16%, we do not even tally…there are some which is 30, 40, there are people wh o
are talking about hyperinflation in India , when you look at th is survey. I would guess that many
of them are not really looking at the overall experience, but looking at salient products –
tomatoes   go up by 40 -50-60% in the current season, and they extr apolate that to all the goods
that they buy. So we have to be a little careful about looking at the level of these surveys . I  Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 10 of 11 would feel more comfortable with the change in the surveys as an indication that we are having
some effect . There is some minor re duction, but not enough to feel confident about. So, I think
there is some way to go for the disinflationary process to go into these expectations. But, I
think our policy would be more driven by actual inflation than by these survey inflationary
expectati ons. Of course, expectations as evidenced or embedded in bond yields might be
something that we would also pay attention to, but I would not take the level of thes e surveys
as Gospel truth.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from Chintan Mehta of P ramerica Mutual Fund. Please go
ahead.
Chintan Mehta : In one of your recent policies, you had talked about making available that export refinance
money partially between export refinance and productive sectors. But, since then there has been
only one speci al 28-day term repo . So sir, just wanted the outlook on that particular parameter?
Dr. Raghuram Rajan:  We did the 28-day term repo, and then when that matured there was a huge amount of liquidity
being released into the economy, because of government spend ing. So we worried about
renewing that amount once again for a similar period and seeing the economy overly flooded
with liquidity and then the next day having to do reverse repos. So, this goes back to the point I
made earlier that perhaps we have to look  into the maturity of these repos, the frequency with
which we do them and ensure that we manage that auction ed liquidity a little better in
streamlining that process. Keeping in mind as Dr. Patel said that if you look at more measures
things are not as ba dly off as if you just look at fluctuations in the call rate. But that said, I
think there is scope for improvement, we are looking at these things, let us see what we can do.
The idea of course of the Urjit Patel Committee Report was to move away from win dows
where you have assured access to auction liquidity . I think we are going to make sure that the
auction liquidity is available in a smooth way.
Moderator : Thank you. The next question is from Sriram Ramanathan of L&T Mutual Fund. Please go
ahead.
Srira m Ramanathan : One or two things related to the Urjit Patel Committee Report and how a lot of things have
been implemented. A couple of things that seem  still to be in the pipeline; one of the things that
was mentioned is the move towards using the 14 -day t erm repo as the overnight policy rate
given its superiority. So just wanted to understand where we stand on the transition? Second
thing is in terms of just a real rate part of it and how that is linked to financial savings, and how
much of a factor that i s going to become from a medium -term perspective to determine where
the appropriate policy stands? Third and a very quick one was in terms of the GBI-EM index
inclusion which has been talked about a lot. Anything at all that the market can take in terms of
any fresh thoughts on that front?   Reserve Bank of India
August 6, 2014
Page 11 of 11 Dr. Raghuram Rajan:  Let me start with the first question when will the term repo what we are looking at in terms of
the effectiveness of policy. I think we need more frequent term auction than we have right now,
because t he 14 -day is driven by a whole lot of factors including fluctuations in liquidity during
that period . So we have to be careful about taking a one 14 -day auction as evidenced over the
whole period. I think if we go towards more frequent term repos, then we will be able to make
a call, especially that market becomes more liquid than the call money market as a measure of
the conditions in the money market. Real rate, if you take the deposit rate as around 9%, and
you take year -on-year inflation at about 7.5% , 7.3% was last month, we are into positive real
rates and these real rates are certainly on par if not better with deposit real rates across the
world. So, we are getting there in terms of real rates. We should see stronger deposit growth on
a sustained ba sis. Let us see. I think we are getting to that point. On the inclusion in the
emerging market index, we are still in talks, those have not been abandoned . But I think the
indices want for the most part a complete elimination of limits on government securi ties
holdings by international investors, and I think until we see through the process of unwinding
of this quantitative easing as well as the beginning of the interest rate tightening cycle, it would
be premature for us to completely abandon all limits . We have said repeatedly, we will expand
the limits as and when they get filled . We did this again just recently, and we are prepared to
look at them as and when they get near being filled. But to completely abandon them at this
stage I think would be irresponsible. If there are indices that want to include us with the
promise that we will expand as and when necessary we are happy to have a discussion . We are
still in discussion with some, but this is the main stumbling block. In the meantime, however,
we are  also discussing with Euroclear for example . And this is a statement made by the Finance
Minister in his budget speech, and to the extent that we can open up access to foreign
institutional investors and through these mechanisms, I think that maybe more im mediate step ,
given the limitations that indices have or given the requirements that indices have.
Alpana Killawala : So that is it, Inba from our side. Thank you, Governor and the Deputy Governors and
Executives, and thank you all participants for joining us. Good day.
Moderator : Thank you. Ladies and Gentlemen, on behalf of Reserve Bank of India that concludes this
conference. Thank you for joining us. You may now disconnect your lines.