Page 1 of 16
“RBI Post Policy Conference Call  for Researchers &
Analysts ”
May 6 , 2013
PARTICIPANTS FROM RESERVE BANK OF INDIA :
DR. D. SUBBARAO – GOVERNOR
DR. K.C. CHAKRABARTY – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
SHRI  H R KHAN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR
DR. URJIT PATEL – DEPUT Y GOVERNOR
SHRI  DEEPAK MOHANTY – EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
MODERATOR  MS. ALPANA KILLAWALA  – CHIEF GENERAL
MANAGER , DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATION
Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 2 of 16 Moderator  Ladies and gentlemen, good day and welcome to the Reserve Bank of India Post Policy
Conference Cal l for R esearchers and Analysts… I would like to hand over the conference to
Ms. Alpana Killawala from RBI. Thank you and over to you ma'am.
Alpana Killawala  Thank you Shyma . Welcome to this post policy researchers teleconference. I will straight away
hand it over to Governor.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you very much, thanks Alpana. You all heard the statement on Friday and over the
weekend, I am sure you have read the statement several times over. And also may have seen
some other dissemination in the print and electro nic media. Regardless , I just wanted to take a
few minutes to go little beyond the statement and give our perspective on the consideration
that went into the policy on Friday.
We reduced the repo rate from 7.5% to 7.25% and you would have noted that this (is)
cumulative reduction of 125 basis points since we started cutting the rate in April last year.
There were two considerations th at went into this policy action.  First was growth. Growth as
you would all recogni se, declined from 9 plus percent  in the pr e-crisis years to 4.5% in the
third quarter of last year. Our current assessment is that the activity will remain subdued during
the first half of this year with a modest pick up in the second half. The second consideration
that went into the policy decisi on was the inflation outlook. Although headline inflation had
eased by March and came close to our tolerance threshold of 5% , it is important to note that
food price pr essures persist  and there  are endemic  supply constrain ts. So our apprehension was
that t his could lead to generali sation of inflation and strains on the balance of payments.
We gave an assessment of the global and domestic economy; I will just make a few comments
on our assessment of the Indian economy. For 2012 -13 last year - the final grow th number  is
not yet available  - The last number available is growth for the third quarter which is 4.5%. For
the first three quarters of last fiscal year, growth was 5.1%. So if we have to end last year with
5% growth, the last quarter we should have expa nded at least by 4.7%. The CSO had put out
advance estimate of GDP for last year which is 5% lower than our base line projection made in
January of 5.5%. Looking ahead, our projection for growth during the current year is 5.7%
with pick up in the second ha lf of the year. That 5.7% growth during the current year is based
on some conditions , in pa rticular , about investment p icking  up. We spoke to corporates ,
industry associations,  and the impression we got was that the pipeline is dry. Also our survey
reveale d that the capacity utili sation is quite low, and investor sentiment is quite subdued.
Then the second condition is that supply constraints have to ease. Third we assume that
monsoon will be normal as forecast and also it is important that the global situa tion does not
throw up any event or process shocks.
On inflation  - when I say inflation now I talk about WPI inflation  - qverage  WPI inflation last
year was 7.8% which is a significant decline from the average WPI inflation in the year before
last that is  2011 -12 of 8.9%. During the current year, our projection for inflation is that it will
be range -bound around 5.5% with some edging down in the first half and some edging up in
the second half. This assessment , of course , factors in the domestic supply dem and balance , the  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 3 of 16 outlook for global commodity prices and expectation of a normal monsoon. We have also
indicated the upside risks to inflation, which are actually four of them. First is the sectoral
demand supply  imbalances, which is quite easy to understa nd. The second is the ongoing and
prospective correction of administered prices , in particul ar, the programmed adjustment of
diesel prices and possible adjustment of coal and electricity prices. The third risk factor stems
from food price pressures, both the MSP increases and wages; and finally , the current account
deficit and its financing will transmit to our inflation through imported inflation and exchange
rate.
On liquidity conditions as you all know we did not take any CRR action. The CRR remains at
4% but you also should note that since we started easing, we have got down CRR by a
cumulative 200 basis points from 6% to 4%. Last year , we infused co nsiderable amount of
liquidity - through CRR Rs. 522 billion  and through OMOs Rs. 1.5 trillion , actually Rs. 1503
billion;  so CRR of 522, OMOs Rs. 1503  together  injection  of  liquidity last year was Rs. 2025
billion. There must have been some reduction out of that number because of our forex
operations.  I also want you to note that there is quite a bit of  liquidity buffer available with the
banks at the moment. They are carrying excess SLR which itself should give them a buffer of
Rs. 3.5 trillion . There is unutili sed export credit  refinance that is about Rs. 200 billion and by
accessing the MSF they can get a s much as Rs. 1.4 trillion. So together they have access to
liquidity of about Rs. 5.2 trillion.
We have also given guidance for the way forward and that is quite clear. Nevertheless  I want
to just add a couple of sentence s on that. This guidance is based  on our assessment of the
macroeconomic outlook and in particular the growth inflation outlook. What we figured was
that there has been a significant decline in the average levels of inflation. We have come down
significantly from the levels that we saw in  2010 -2011 and indeed in 2012 and after a long
time, we  are within striking distance of our threshold inflation of 5%. So what we indicated
was that our baseline position  is that we need to consolidate on these gains on inflation and be
alert to the upside  risk fac tors and our baseline position  is that if the growth inflation scenario
unfolds as we expect  it to, the room for further rate action is little. However, there could be
action either way. If inflation pressure s re-emerge or if CAD deteriorates more  than we have
factored in, we need to take action, we will need to respond to that and take action. On the
other side , should inflation recede further and faster, current account deficit moderate more
than we have factored in, or if the upside risk factors  become more benign, then  space would
open up for easing  policy and further supportin g growth revival. So the sum and substance  of
this is that our base line  projection is that, there is little space for further monetary policy
easing. But in the next few months, if the situation changes it could go either way. I will stop
there, thank you very much.
Alpana Killawala  Thank you sir. May I request the participants to be brief in their questions and ask one question
at a time? Will you please announce Shyma ?
Moderator  Sure ma'am. We have the first question from the line of Mahruk Adajania  from Standard
Chartered. Please go ahead.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 4 of 16 Mahruk Adajania  Good Afternoon. Thank you. I have two questions, I will ask one and if you have time for one
more then we can take th at as well. The first question is that, is RBI happy with the
transmission of monetary policy by banks because as the Governor pointed out the total
reduction in repo has been 125 basis point since you started easing. Base rates have come off
but not by an  equal amount. The second question really is that on the Cobrapost allegations .
The policy does mention that there will be guidelines on wealth management and other stuff,
but the press also mentions and probably they picked it up from the media call that RBI is
likely to issue show cause notices to the banks which  were alleged in the April expose. So is
that correct?
Dr. D. Subbarao  On the first question Mahrukh, you are right that the base rates ha ve come down. They ha ve
not come down one to one, even as  we cut rates by 125 basis points including on Friday. What
we reported in the document is that the base  rate, the model base rates had  come down by
about 50 basis points. So it has not been a one -to-one correspondence. But as we noted, as I
had said in th e media dissemination after that, the yields in the money market have come down
as a consequence of this , yields on G -Secs have;  so to the extent that corporate bond s are
priced off the G -Sec yield curve that would have softened and made money cheaper for
corporates. Even bank borrowing would become cheaper firs t because of the lower rate in the
LAF  window and lower rate that they would get in the money market. Also I have been told
that a lot of projects which have been found to be unviable because of the internal rate of
return being above the hurdle rate, they might become viabl e because the hurdle rate will go
down  has a result of this. So some transmission will take place through other routes and we
expect also that base rates will come down in the mont hs ahead even if in the immediate, next
few weeks , there may not be any action. Anything else Deepak ? On the second question about
Cobrapost…
Dr. K C Chakrabarty  You see , look, our reaction is not based on Cobrapost.com. You see actually whatever they
have  been reported we have verified those branches, we have not  found anything irregular
there.  But during this period we are otherwise also looking into how the anti -money laundering
guideline s, how the KYC guideline s, how they are implemented by the branches  and how the
people are looking, because we cannot remain insensitive to what comes in the media. So we
have done a s pecial inspection of first 3 banks  then we are doing for other banks . Based on that
we see that there are certain deficiencies, irregularit ies in the matter of KYC compliance, in the
matter of reporting of suspicious transaction s, in the matter of selling of third party products
specially gold and other things. There are also other area s. Based on that we have to issue a
show cause notice. Wh enever we do that thing, we will take the explanation from the bank,
based on that appropriate action will be taken . That is at the individual bank level. But system
as a whole  we feel that there is a need to strengthen our guidelines and that is a process  being
taken and it has bee n mentioned in the Governor’s annual policy statement . Respective
departments will follow up and will try to strengthen the system. This is the position as of
today.
Mahruk Adajania  Okay sir,  so it does not necessarily mean that  there will be show cause notices to the banks
alleged, it can be to any bank where some systems may not be in place.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 5 of 16 Dr. K C Chakrabarty  Today all other banks have also been given  the same under same allegation.  So that is why we
do not go by what the media says  but we are sensitive to them . You see we definitely look into
that we cannot ignore that thing and based on that we do our own investigation, we take our
own decision and we take our own action.
Moderator  Thank you. We have the next question fro m the line of Shishir S hindekar from BYK Colleg e
of Commerce. Please go ahead.
Shishir S hindekar  Respected D r. Governor and Deputy Governors.  Sir thanks for providing this opportunity. You
have done a great job since January beyond expectations with courag e and believing in the
strengths of Indian economy. Sir I am Shishir Sindekar  from Nasik. Sir if you are the chairman
of FED  would you like to continue with quantitative easing programs or austerity programs ?
And regarding Indian economy, what will be the satisfactory level of fiscal deficit as well as
current account deficit as a percentage of GDP for India, and what exactly you are expecting it
in the year 2013 -14? Thank you sir.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you Shishir, what are you studying?
Shishir S hindekar  I am actually a Ph.D. student.
Dr. D. Subbarao  What is the topic of your dissertation?
Shishir S hindekar  Standard of living and monetary policy.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Very good . Do send it to us after you have done the dissertation, we would like to look at that ,
the link between quality of life or standard of living and Monetary Policy. Okay, now about
your questions . We are not doing any quantitative easing. Quantitative easing is being done by
advanced economy central banks who hit the zero low upon  and the re is the  whole big debate
on the advisability of that. So from an Indian perspective, we need to study that for our own
understanding and also because it has implications for us through capital f lows. So what
advanced economy central b anks are doing by way o f quantitative easing is important for us,
but we ourselves are not doing any quantitative easing. Second about fiscal and  current
account deficit etc, what we are learning from the recent debate on Reinhart and Rogoff , etc.,
is that even as we try to put  some numbers on this, we have got to understand those numbers
with reference to the assumptions we make and the economic context in which we make them.
I hope you are following that debate that is coming in the media about the Reinhart and Rogoff
that 90% debt GDP limit being sharp inflection point where growth accelerates rapidly . Okay ,
so our fiscal deficit numbers they are quite large now, if you take the Center and States
together, fiscal deficit is of the order of close to 9%, must be brought  down.  And the FRBM as
well as the Kelkar committee said that the Central Government must bring fiscal deficit down
to 3% of GDP. As much as that quantitative indicator is important, it is also important to focus
on the quality of fiscal adjustment. Okay? Current account deficit, the Reserve Bank’s estimate
given some assumptions about macroeconomic variables is that a sustainable current account  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 6 of 16 deficit for India is 2.5% of GDP. S o you would note that at close  to 5% of GDP current
account deficit last year, we are  way above the sustainable limit. Thank you.
Shishir S hindekar  Sir the housing price index is continuously growing, so do you feel any problem regarding the
housing price bubble or like that?
Dr. D. Subbarao  No there is no bubble. Housing price index is sh owing an increase and we have reported that in
our document that came out on Thursday. The monetary and macroeconomic development
document  which shows the housing price index, I  think in 9 cities of the country and there is
no bubble building up there. Oka y, thank you let us move on.
Moderator  Thank you. We have the next question from the line of Kumar Rachapuddi from ANZ Bank.
Please go ahead.
Kumar Rachapuddi  Thank you sir for the opportunity. Couple of questions please . First one while the RBI was in
the hiking cycle you have felt that it is important for monetary tran smission that the liquidity
deficit be around -1% of NDTL. Do y ou think the same holds  true even in the cutting cycle as
well or w ould you think that the liquidity conditions should ease fro m those levels? The
second one is on the current account deficit which has just been answered but within that I
would like to know, your expectations of oil and gold prices going forward as well as your
comfort zone for current account deficit as a percent age of GDP in the next few quarters as
opposed to the medium term goal of 2.5% . Thank you.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you very much Kumar. On the liquidity situation, we still maintain that our objective is
to maintain liquidity with in plus minus 1% of NDTL. An d some people have asked us when
you are actually easing the policy rate, why do you want to still keep liquidity in a slightly
deficit mode? That is because we believe that is consistent with our overall stance. However
we recogni se that over the last few  months it has gone above that 1% NDTL limit because of
frictional and structural factors ; in particular the cost of the large government cash balances
with the Reserve Bank and the wedge between deposit and credit growth for much of last year,
although th ere was convergence towards the end of last year. We hope both these factors to
unwind in the course of the next few months and the liquidity situation should be less
uncomfortable than it was in the past few months. We have also indicated that we will act ively
manage liquidity and consistent with that we announced OMO of  Rs.100 billion on Friday
evening after market hours. On your question about oil and gold prices, I do not think we want
to really indicate our understanding or assessment of gold and oil prices. We hope that they
remain  soft and they will keep coming down , for our economy , for our monetary management
but we have no control over them. Oil prices are subject to number of supply and demand side
uncertainties and gold prices too are subject to demand supply balances and are subject to how
people assess inflation in this country. We are hoping that with inflation coming down and
with expectation that it might remain at that level more or less, the demand for gold in India
will come down. Okay, th ank you.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 7 of 16 Moderator  Thank you. We have the next question from the line of Shubhada Rao from Yes Bank. Please
go ahead.
Shubhada Rao  Good afternoon everyone. Just one question regarding the guidance, particularly around CAD
concerns. Our observation tells us  that the interest sensitive non -oil, non -gold trade account is
in surplus particularly since February and outlook is more benign than ever before, so are we
overlooking some risks probably, specially when the guidance says that any swift reversal can
take place if the risks play out, so your thoughts on this one please.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Can you be more specific?
Shubha da Rao Yes. We have observed that since February non -oil, non -gold trade account is in surplus , it is
not in deficit , i.e., at 57% of the tr ade account and the outlook particularly look at the growth
and the pricing power and so on looks more benign , particularly for that turning into deficit in
the immediate term. Are some risks that we have overlooked , particularly when we see your
risks com ing as pointing towards any likeli hood of a swift reversal if the CAD turns on the
negative side or worsening side? So there was some disconnect between our expectations and
what came out in the guidance, so just wanted some highlighting from your side.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you S hubhada. On oil prices as I said in answer to one earlier question, even as they
have softened and modestly firmed up in the last few weeks, we cannot be certain about what
the behavior will be because this is subject to both econo mic and political uncertainty around
the world ;  on the supply side both political and economic considerations , on the demand side
by economic considerations. So we had a numb er for, that went into our model, I am
somewhat uncomfortable about giving that n umber but we should be alive  to the risk of oil
prices going up. Second on gold itself, yes as I said again if with inflation coming down, gold
demands should come down but how much it will come down, is not certain. Now the risk that
we highlighted or we took into account in the guidance or in enumerating the risk factors was
about first the large current account deficit , the second the financing of the current account
deficit. We were able to finance CAD of as high as 6.7% in the third quarter of last yea r
because capital flow had come in and we were conscious of the fact that as much as pull
factors were in play the re, there  were also push  factors,   the enormous amount of  global
liquidity. And that liquidity could reverse quite swiftly . Even if there i s no r eversal of
quantitative easing if there is some process shocker either in the Euro zone or in the US, let us
say like if Cypru s had extended for a few more days, there would have been a reversal of
capital flows out of emerging economies including In dia. So we did not want to rule off the
risk factors like that and that is what we tried to reflect in the risk factors as well as in our
guidance.
Shubha da Rao In that case sir would it be right to ask you and request you for a ball park CAD estimate tha t
RBI may be working with for FY -’14?
Dr. D. Subbarao  It will be lower than last year. Last year it might be about 5% , close to 5%. All expectations
including that of the Reserve Bank are that it will be lower . We have looked at the  numbers  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 8 of 16 for the last q uarter of last year. It is too early to get numbers for this year, but we are hoping
that exports will pick  up and imports will soften or will not pick up that fast. So we expect it to
be lower but I do not think there is a number that we want to disclose.
Moderator  Thank you. We have the next question from the line of Sonal Verma  from Nomura. Please go
ahead.
Sonal Verma  Hi Sir on this liquidity issue, I wanted to ask you at some point in time, would the RBI be
comfortable with shifting the overnight trad e from repo to between the corridor or to reverse
repo and under what conditions?
Dr. D. Subbarao  At some point of time, yes when we said plus/minus 1% NDTL that will go to minus 1%
NDTL some time. But at the moment you recogni se that we are still maintain ing an anti -
inflation stance. And as we have indicated, inflation threat is still very much there. The re are a
number of upside risk factors that could potentially come into play, so the expectation should
be that liquidity will be in deficit for the next few months at least.
Sonal Verma  Sir post that if inflation does moderate then you would look at shifting the corridor?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Well , yes but how much is an open question. How much it comes down and whether we ass ess
that decline in inflation to be pure sustained and durable, it will depend on that judgment.
Sonal Verma  Okay . Sir another thing is, i f WPI, you know we are not talking about this 5, 5 .5 and a half and
GDP at 5.7 when we are still talking about potential at 7% then why is there only a little space
for policy easing? Does the RBI have CPI in mind while we talk about WPI or do you think
potential growth is lower?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Well potential growth is lower, we have given out our number o f potential growth, which is
7% but even when w e are growing at 5% we are having inflation pressures. And if you have
read the report of the Economic Advisory Council , Sonal, you would have seen that they
talked about this in more than one paragraph, they talked about productivity levels going
down, ICOR going up. Because if you are having savings rate of 32% and we are growing only
at 5%, that means that the ICOR  has gone up. And so there are lot to be concerned about the
mismatc hes, the sectoral imbalances in the economy and in the supply constrains e specially in
the infrastructure sectors which are adding cost s eroding competitiveness and eroding ICOR .
Sonal Verma  Just one final small question, you said you will be actively managing liquidity, will there be a
greater reliance on open market operations  rather than cash reserve ratio and i s FX intervention
a possible tool?
Dr. D. Subbarao  No, on relative choice between  CRR and OMO it depends on whether we assesses  the liquidity
deficit to be structural or fr ictional or transient. We will also assess whet her the liquidity
shortage is across all the banks or it is confined to a few banks only. What was the second
question?   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 9 of 16 Sonal Verma  FX intervention is that a possible tool?
Dr. D. Subbarao  We don’t use forex i ntervention as a liquidity tool. If a forex intervention changes liquidity
either way that is an incidental by product, but liquidity infusion or liquidity removal is not an
objective of forex  intervention.
Moderator  We have the next question from the line of Samiran Chakrava rty from Standard Chartered .
Please go ahead.
Samiran Chakrava rty Good afternoon sir. My question is about the inflation guidance, I can pick out that you have
commented 3 things on the forward looking trajectory of inflation. One is you have mentioned
that the average inflation is going to be around 5.5%. You have said that second half inflation
is likely to be higher than the first half and you have said that you expect the margin ed
inflation to be about 5%. I am having difficulty in understanding what kind of trajectory would
ensu re that all three of these assumptions will hold ?
Dr. D. Subbarao  You saw the Fan chart Samiran, and that is right. We showed inflation March  2014 at 6% with
I think quite a lot have  read around the 6% that is the most probable estimate. But then we said
in a paragraph following that that we will endeavor  to bring inflation down to 5%.  So you are
quite right to be a bit confused between  our statements in the two consecutive paragraphs. So if
we do nothing, we expect inflation to be around 6% edging up in th e second half, but we will
assess the situation or take action as may be necessary including communication, including
macro -prudential  tools to try and bring inflation down and inflation expectations down. I think
it will be difficult for me to say anythin g beyond this because my English will then fail me.
Moderator  We have the next question from the line of Soumya Kanti Ghosh  from ICRIER . Please go
ahead.
Soumya Kanti Ghosh  I have a couple of questions. The first question regarding th is growth inflation tr ade off . I
believe that RBI had done in the past some st udy regarding the sacrifice  ratio during the period
1975 till 2000 where it was found out to be around 2. Has there been any recent study
regarding that  growth inflation trade off because empirical ev idence suggests that sacrifice
ratios tend to increase significantly in a period of declining  inflation? And the second point is
that the RBI document has been also consciously talking about CPI inflation being at relatively
higher levels with the WPI infl ation and the wide divergence between the two.
Notwithstanding the fact that a new CPI being of a recent origin . Is there any CPI target which
the Reserve Bank is currently looking at?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Are you working on this growth inflation trade off?
Soumya Kanti Ghosh  Yes sir, I have been working.
Dr. D. Subbarao  I am going to ask Deepak Mohanty, our Executive Director, who actually did this work to
answer your question.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 10 of 16 Deepak Mohanty  In terms of your question on the sacrifice  ratio, the observation is right. We have seen the
average relationship of about 2, but again it is asymmetric at different intervals of growth and
inflation, it becomes different. The latest study on that is by the IMF, they did a paper, but I am
not too sure whether they have put in the public domain. So that aga in kind of confirms the
finding  that we had earlier that 2 is the kind of average sacrifice ratio.
Dr. D. Subbarao  On to your second question, we have no CPI target, nevertheless I want to emphasi se once
again that we look at CPI , we look at all the three CPI as well as the new composite CPI and
we try like everyone else including perhaps yourself to study why there is a divergence or
convergence between WPI and CPI. But we do not have a CPI inflation objective.
Moderator  We have the next question from the line of Prashant Shah from Vantage Securities . Please go
ahead.
Prashant Shah  Good afternoon sir. Just wanted to ask you, you mentioned in your outlook that you are
projecting base line GDP  growth projections at 5.7%. Now y ou have mentioned that you see
the economy activity to be modest in the first half with a pick up expected in the second half
based upon our normal monsoon, which should boost agricultural growth, but other  sector
lines , you seem to be not being very bulli sh on that. With the GDP expected to grow at about
5%, how do you reconcile this with that 0.7% extra growth in 2014?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Good question.  You are right that agriculture, we expect agriculture to return trend growth
which is of the order of 3.5% on the expectation of a normal monsoon as has been forecast. As
far as the industry is concerned, there is considerable excess capacity. So the first order of
economic activity will be for that excess capacity to be utili sed, and then new capacity will
have to come in to play. Also as I said at the beginning of this conference, there is unutili sed
capacity and pipeline is dry. So as for the pipeline to be built up will take time for investors to
reappraise the projects and make the applications to financial  institutions and banks. So we are
expecting and hoping that in the first half of this year that process will take place so that by the
time we come into the second half, industry and services will pick up. On the services side, as
industry picks up, as ag riculture picks up there will be some corresponding pick up in services
sector activity and service s sector activity might also pick up if global situation improves.
Dr. Urijit Patel  I think that one boost to growth even without new investment is the exist ing standard
investment especially in the energy sector . If that comes into play, you would get a boost in
industrial production and therefore one doesn’t necessarily need a sharp pickup in investment
for more output growth. There is a fair number of inves tments which are waiting to come into
line.
Prashant Shah  I just wanted to make one more observation I have . In the last cycle in terms of the
transmission from food inflation  to manufactured inflation when the inflation spiked up, we
had sufficient room t o at least cut our monetary policy, because we growing in excess of 8%.
But if a similar situation occurs in this cycle around, food inflation is still close to 10% and  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 11 of 16 core manufacturing is close to 4%, but we are also growing at less than 5% . So what act ion
would we be having  in that case, in case, food inflation transfers to manufacturing inflation?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Yes, that of course there is a continuing concern , Prashant.  That is why we keep saying that
even if monetary policy does not have much to do  with food inflation as such, the food
inflation or any inflation that is triggered by supply shocks persists, it will have impact on
inflation expectations and inflation might get generali sed. Therefore we continue to be
concerned about inflation stemming  from supply shocks. You are right that the headroom for
monetary policy action is much less than we had in the pre -crisis years  or in the immediate
post crisis period and that we have to be watchful about that.
Moderator  The next question is from the line  of Bhaskar Chatterjee from L&T . Please go ahead.
Bhaskar Chatterjee  Good afternoon sir . I have two questions. My first question relates to the transmission
mechanism, now the credit channel transmission has been weak in India. It all bo ils down to
the iss ues relating to rising cost of funds, even  low deposit growth and the load of the
deteriorating asset quality across banks. This brings us to the paradox of low credit  growth  to
industries when RBI had taken a relatively accommodative stance in 201 2-13. Gi ven a stance
of limited policy space for 2013 -14, how do you support your target for overall credit  growth
of around 15% and credit availability to crucial  sectors like infrastructure? Secondly, with
around 5% GDP growth we  are expected to end up with a CA D of around 5% in 2012 -13.
Now if growth revives in India in H2 2013 -14, some forecast ers project a CAD of around
(+6%) . Now like inflation, is CAD also on a new -normal, should we look at a higher
sustainable CAD level?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Our Deputy Governor , Urjit Patel will answer this question.
Dr. Urjit Patel  Let me take the last question first. You made several points. I don’t think they were necessarily
coherent in terms of the logic, but if I would comment on the current account deficit , the issue
is ho w much the current account deficit is sustainable depends on the extent  to which we can
rely on stable, predictable flows from the rest of the world  coming in to India . Given that I
don’t think that th e RBI needs to revisit its long -standing sustainable CAD  of about 2.5%. On
the issue of credit growth, the important thing to remember is that we are predicting credit
growth slightly above last year and you find tha t to be difficult to understand.  But we are also
predicting output growth to be a little larger than last year. Therefore I don’t see that as much
of a disconnect that credit growth is about 1 percentage point higher than what it was last year
because output is supposed to be about well at least 0.7% of a percentage point higher. So I
don’t think the re is a disconnect there. Also remember that on the deposit side, one of the
changes that is likely to take place is that as inflation moderates, you are going to get re-
intermediation into the financial and banking system savings that were going outside t he
financial and banking system. So I think there is consistency there between deposit growth,
credit growth , and our output projection.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 12 of 16 Bhaskar Chatterjee  What you mean to say is that deposit growth would be much more vibrant than last year and a
lot of m oney will flow fr om commodities like gold back in to banks?
Dr. Urjit Patel  Yes, that is a possibility because the real rate of return as inflation comes down on the financial
products would rise.
Moderator  We have the next question from the line of Shyam P oddar from Forex Capital . Please go
ahead.
Shyam Poddar  Good afternoon everybody.  First question is that if you look at the sharp decline of the FIIs
inflow from January 2013 , particularly from February when it was over $5 billion, which has
come down to h ardly $1.9 billion. Secondly as Governor rightly said that in spite of the 1.25%
decline in the interest rate, the real benefit is not being passed to MSME sectors either by way
of export finance or even in the real finance. So in that scenario, what measu res can be taken
where the real effect, as you have also agreed  sir, that only 50%, 0.50 basis points has been
passed on the base rate, which is a very selective basis. But you have declined the rates from
1.25. Is it not possible like last time also I sug gested having some sort of a mechanism where
the uniform benchmark rates should be decided for the MSME sector particularly, so they
should avail the export finance at a similar rate as per their credit worthiness?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you Shyam, we appre ciate your concern and I want you to know that the Reserve Bank
is sensitive to the need  for flow of credit to the MSME sector, which we recogni se is
disadvantaged. Especially in situation like this now when many of them are not getting
payments for what t hey have supplied. Two points, first in the Reserve Bank, we have moved
away from sectoral regulation , micro management, we leave it largely  to banks and signal a
monetary policy stance through the policy repo rate. Even as regulator of banks or as the
supervisor of banks, we do not get into the interest rate structures of banks unless we see that
there are gross irregularities or  some mistaken priorities. The first MSME sector is concerned;
we did one thing in the last policy which is to say raise the limi ts of credit to them which will
be eligible for priority sector. Every time we meet banks both on a bilateral basis and as a
group, we do talk about the distress that the MSME sector is under and about the need for
banks to be more sensitive to giving cred it to that sector. But I think it will be improper and
regressive for the Reserve Bank to now get back into the business of setting rates for specific
sectors.  I am going to refer to the Deputy Governor  – Mr. Khan, who will extend my answer to
your questio n. You are happy with my answer, but we want to make you happier.
H R Khan  As the Governor had mentioned in the policy, we had set up a committee under the
Chairmanship of Mr. Padmanabhan, technical committee for facilities to the export sector. So
quite a  few recommendations which will also include MSME sector are being finali sed by this
committee and the committee’s report is coming out today evening, so please have a look.
Dr. D. Subbarao  So please watch for that Shyam. This evening the report will come and that report as you may
not recall immediatel y that report is to look at non -finance facilities for export as much as we
are concerned about finance. But we have also talked that we should let into the interface of  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 13 of 16 exporters with banks and other financi al institutions. Lot of exporters complain about
frustrating procedures, length of time it takes to get clearances, the harassment that they have
to go through because of repeated visits , etc. So we have appointed a committee under our
Executive Director, Mr. Padmanabhan, they have studied all this issue including talking to
some banks and talking to MSME associations and that report will come out this afternoon.
Now, we wait for your next question.
Shyam Poddar  My next question is, there is a lot of talk to control the volatility in the Indian market, which is
being influenced by the global volatility even the Singapore and the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, they have opened up the rupee -dollar options and the rupee -dollar future contracts .
Why don’t we , to curb that activity, is it not possible to extend the trading hour in the Indian
market so that participants , particularly the gold and silver importers , they participate in the
offshore market, they can hedge their risk in India itself rather going to the o ffshore
exchanges?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Our Deputy Governor  Khan, will answer that question.
H R Khan  We had received representation from some of these quarters for extending market hours.
Extending market hours have other implications because forex market will  not function
independent of itself , it has linkage with the market liquidity and other conditions. So we have
to examine that proposal very carefully just open ing the forex market for the sake of one
particular segment. So far as Indian hedging going to o ther markets are concerned, you will
remember that we had said that  we are trying to liberali se  so that  more and more people come
to the onshore market and in this policy we have indicated that for the FIIs even the currency
futures market subject to cert ain conditions we will permit them. We are also considering some
other measures possibly for simplification of documentation so that people more and more
hedge and come to the onshore market. The second thing which has been mentioned very
clearly in the po licy about unhedged  portions of the corporate s, that is wh y we a re now
creating  a structure,  an incentive  or disincentive  structure so that corporate com e for  more
and more hedging so that volatility on their balance sheet is  minimi sed and in the process
volatility in the market also is minimi sed.
Moderator  We have the next question from the line of Raghvan Munjurpattu  from SBI Life Insurance .
Please go ahead.
Raghvan Munjurpattu  Good afternoon to all . My question is sir that t he macroeconomic group that generally gets
released one day before, just wanted to know whether the department that prepare s the
monetary policy and the technical committee that sits on and decides the monetary policy, is it
the same that goes through and prepares this report or the views could be completely different.
Why I am asking this is specifically because once we had a look at the monetary policy, the
macroeconomic report, one got the feeling that the hawkishness was very clear and words like
‘very limited ’ were being used in terms of monetary policy space. So if that was the case, why
did this 25 bps rate cut have to be done if the space was already less and there is only a small
amount of time that we had seen gold and other positive improvements happening in terms of  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 14 of 16 CAD? Th at is one question. The second question being that a few months before when we
were following the monetary policy review and the pre -policy reports, QE was looked at from
a perspective of creating higher inflation expectations and higher inflation domestic ally in
India, so higher the QE, more would be the inflation, but now we see that QE is being looked
at from a perspective that if QE reduces maybe globally than that would be causing further
outflows or at least a stoppage of inflows. So one aspect is a n egative and here we look at QE
as being positive as far as flows are happening. Has the position of RBI changed in terms of
looking at QE or how should we interpret it right now?
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you Raghvan. On the first question, of course different  people , different departments
initiate these repo rts. The money macro document as we informally call it that comes a day
before the policy and the policy statement that comes on the day of the policy, but there is
convergence  that takes place at the senio r management level. So as far as external stakeholders
are concerned, both these documents should be seen as institutional products of the Reserve
Bank irrespective of our internal process es of who is preparing what and at what level the
convergence takes place. In the monetary and macro  developments report that come  out a day
before the policy, we try to make an objective assessment of the macroeconomic situation  and
there is no overt intention to communicate a particular stance. It is an objective assessm ent. It
is analyst s such as yourself , you draw your own conclusions, of course that is fair, but it is
quite possible that different people reading the same document get different perceptions. In the
policy document, we of course try to nuance our understa nding of the situation and give an
indication and an explanation; an indication of our assessment of the macroeconomic situation
and an explanation for our policy including the guidance. Several times analysts such as
yourself  have told us that there is a disconnect between these two documents and particularly
in last week, more people have said that there is a disconnect. It could well be, I am not trying
to affirm or deny a disconnect. But that itself is not going to be something that we are going to
worr y over because we try to be objective in both the documents. Anything else that I need  to
say in answer to this question?  You are satisfied, but I think we want to satisfy ourselves.
Deepak Mohanty  Macroeconomic and Monetary Development   document apart fro m the stance I think the
essence of that is again more factual. Lot of information i s being put out there; analysis,
forward -looking information, so it has value in that sense. Those stance it is again subject to
judgement whether it is differing from the way policy is coming up.
Dr. Urijit Patel  On the first question, you know it is interesting that after the MMDR was released, people said
it had a hawkish tone. Actually after the monetary policy itself, people said there was no
hawkish tone. So I think t here was a fair amount of congruence in terms of what we were
trying to say.
Dr. D. Subbarao  On your second question about the quantitative easing, you are right to observe that when we
were growing vigorously in the pre -crisis years and there w as capital coming in, we had  one
type of problem, which is that of capital flow beyond our requirement which was leading to
appreciation of the currency quite unrelated to fundamentals. Then the problem was of how to
cope with that excess capital flows and with the a ppreciation of the currency which was  Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 15 of 16 unrelated to our fundamentals. Now , we have a current account deficit, the flows coming in , so
we are in somewhat of a sweet spot as it were  because we have a la rge current account deficit
that is being financed, but t hat is not a place we want to be in. We want to have a low er current
accoun t deficit which is financed by non-debt, stable flows. So even as the current global
liquidity situation is made our challenge less of a challenge , it is still a big prob lem. So you  are
right that both the problems whether currency is appreciating because of too much of capital
flow or currency is depreciating because of too little capital flow, both are problems for
external sector management and by implication for monetary policy m anagement. So we have
no value judgment on one being good or bad. We would like ideally a low current account
deficit whic h is financed by stable and non -debt creating flows.
Raghvan Munjurpattu  With regard to the first question, I just asked if the n there  was very limited space in either of
the reports if they both sounded the same, then what was the major factor that incited a rate cut
at this point of time?
Dr. D. Subbarao  We indicated that in the policy, the major factor that informed the policy decisio n was that the
growth has moderated and inflation has moderated.
Moderator  We have the last question from the line of Manish Wadhawan  from HSBC . Please go ahead.
Manish Wadhawan  Sir good afternoon. This question is regarding OMOs as a tool for managing liq uidity. I think
you made a comment on Friday that if  liquidity is a problem OMOs are as good as CRR if not
better and an indication from the MPD Advisor - in-charge two days back that CRR is at 40 -
year low and further scope of CRR cut is considered quite l ow. In view of these statements and
with the persistent liquidity deficit, is it reasonable to presume that going further OMOs will
remain the preferred tool to calibrate liquidity? And secondly if that is true, is it not possible
for RBI to announce the o verall indicative quantum of OMO it plans to do in the financial year
as it would help the market participant s in planning the liquidity planning and investment
strategy. And such guidance would also be consistent with the efforts made by RBI to be more
predictable through its guidance and policy rates .
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you for both those questions, very clear.  On the first question, the assumption that OMO
will be the preferred tool is wrong. Don’t go with that assumption. We will use all options
available to us depending on how we assess the liquidity situation to be. It could be OMO, it
could be CRR, and it could be something else. On the second question, as much as we would
like to be predictable and give guidance to the market for long term plannin g, it is difficult to
give a plan for the entire year or even for a few months on the OMO because the liquidity
situation is rapidly evolving. There are a lot of uncertainties including about the government’s
spending pattern, about deposit mobilization, about the rate of credit growth. So we don’t want
to give a plan and then change it and confuse stakeholders even more. So given the level of
uncertainty, I think we are somewhat constrained to go with the present plan of managing
liquidity actively and ann ouncing OMOs as and when necessary, but I will certainly keep your
advice in view.   Reserve Bank of India
May 6, 2013
Page 16 of 16 Manish Wadhawan  One final question, there has been a talk in the press regarding auctioning these government
balances with the banks . Has there been any  decision or what is your view on that if that is
something in the near future?
Dr. D. Subbarao  That is in discussion with the government, auctioning of cash balances to the banks, but I want
you to know and I am sure you know that by auctioning this we are not going to change  the
overall liquidity situation. Banks instead of borrowing it from us  from the LAF window , they
will be getting these securities through some other window. They will be getting money
through some other window, so overall it should not change the liquidit y situation. What it will
change is the costs to the government. So we will of course come out with a decision when we
have concluded our discussions with the government and then let all of you know.
Dr. D. Subbarao  Thank you very much, I wanted to thank a ll the analysts who asked questions and several
many others who silently listened to this interaction. We attach a lot of value as I said on
previous occasions. In fact not only at this conference, but even when  I met some of you
interlocutors  on a one -on-one basis, I asked you people whether this is adding any value to you
and every  one of you said that it is adding value. I want you know that we learn a lot from
talking to you little 24 or 48 hours after the policy.  So thank you very much.  We hope to keep
this going in future policy reviews.
Moderator  Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen on behalf of Reserve Bank of India that concludes this
conference call. Thank you for joining us and you may now disconnect your lines.