1 Edited Transcript of the Governor’s Interaction with CNBC -TV18 at the
World Economic Forum 2024 at Davos on January 18, 2024
Shereen Bhan:
Welcome to the CNBC- TV18 Special Lunch. We  are coming to you live from Davos
2024. You have seen a slew of headlines here on CNBC -TV18 and joining me now is
the RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das. Mr. Das , always a pleasure. Thank you so much
for joining us here on CNBC -TV18. You are quite the envy here of everyone in Davos.
Mr. Das, I was looking at a press conference that you were doing a few days ago when
you arrived in Davos. Many were almost saying that they were feeling jealous of the
position that you find yourself in.
Shaktikanta Das:
Well! Good m orning and thank you for having me here. I cannot say how others are
looking at India,  but the journey has been quite challenging for almost every country ,
especially in the last four years , which I have described elsewhere as a  period of great
volatility . The volatility and the challenges on the global scale are still continuing.
Amidst all these challenges , India has navigated very well. The various authorities,
agencies and in the case of the Reserve Bank, overall India has navigated well. In
terms of macroeconomic stability, macroeconomic growth, in terms of financial
stability, in terms of Monetary Policy  actions and their outcome and bringing inflation
under control, India is today well placed. It showed its resilience.  India is well -placed
to deal wi th emerging challenges.
Having raised this point, what is now the focus which should now be the focus and
what is our continuing focus is to maintain that stability, maintain that resilience and
work towards improving it and strengthening it further. Indi a is, on the whole,  doing
well and we will continue to do well as per the current indications.
Shereen Bhan:
Let me pick up on that comment that you made.  You have called it a period of great
volatility between 2020 and 2023. On the back of the conversations that you had here
in Davos as well as some of the emerging uncertainties , for instance, the attacks that
we are seeing on the Red Sea,  etc., what is the outlook now as far as 2024 is
concerned? Domestic , of course, as you rightly pointed out , is much more stable, and
relatively calmer , but what about the global factors that we will need to be watchful  of?
Shaktikanta Das:
All these global geopolitical flashpoints are evolving. Around the Red Sea region, how
it will evolve in the coming days, we have to wait and see. Only time will tell. As things
stand today , India will be able to deal with the existing challenges , but we have to see
how it all plays out in the future weeks or months . This kind of uncertainty mak es
policymaking really that muc h more complex.  2 Shereen Bhan:
Speaking of complex policy challenges , the central bank ers' dilemma  and the central
bankers ' challenge at this point is that there is a clamo ur from industry , from
consumers , and perhaps even from the G overnment to cut rates , but there is a fear in
the risk that if you move too  prematurely or too  early , you could in fact cause more
disruption and upset things further. I know you have firmly said that there will be a
change in stance or a cut only if you get to 4% on a sustainable basis . But, as a central
banker and you have been talking to other central bankers here as well , isn't that  a big
challenge and a  big dilemma for you?
Shaktikanta Das:
You have partly answered the question.  The markets all over the world are running
ahead of the thinking of the central banks. In India,  you mentioned that there is an
expectation from various quarters about a rate cut and all that . Frankly speaking,  the
serious players  in India,  whether it is the industry or the private sector or it is  the
analysts or the economists or the serious market players ; I do not think anybody is
expecting a rate cut now. In most of the advanced economies , the markets the
stakeholders and the market players ' assumptions are ahead and they are overrunning
their central banks. So for as India is concerned,  the thinking of the central bank and
the thinking of market participants  are much better aligned.
With regard to inflation, our policy has to remain actively disinflationary till we reach
the target of 4% on a durable or sustainable basis and that is our current stance.
Ultimately, why are we working towards this 4% inflation? Because a stable inflation ,
what we call price stability, provides support  to the growth. It acts as a bedrock for
sustainable growth. Ot herwise, you will often have known data of growth doing well,
then again slipping back. Y ou are absolutely right in saying that any premature pivot
in our policy  can be very, very costly for the economy.
Shereen Bhan:
You talked about growth and the NSO advanced estimate has specked growth higher
than the RBI's estimate. On the back of the data that we are looking at today, do you
believe that there is an upside projection or growth that  could do better than your own
estimates?
Shaktikanta Das:
We said a 7% growth rate for the current year , i.e., 20 23-24. Our earlier projection was
6.5%  and the market was also around 6.5% . When I said 7%  in one of the events in
October  2023 and followed up by our Monetary Policy Statement . At that time 7 % was
seen as optimistic, but subsequently , the NSO  came out with later period data about
a month later . They had a later period data and the NSO has access to several other
data to which we do not have access . In the Monetary P olicy conference, the Deputy
Governor had said that  7% is a conservative estimate  and we were expecting that it
could exceed 7% , but we wanted to be sure about our number. T he growth momentum 3 of economic activity is well maintained and next year growth will be touching 7 %. When
that happens , India would have recorded a growth of 7% or more for four consecutive
years .
Shereen Bhan:
So confident as far as growth is concerned!
Shaktikanta Das:
We are confident . Unless I am confident , I will not say anything. I do not speak about
it.
Shereen Bhan:
I am sure about that but  let us talk about what is happening as far as the markets are
concerned.  Yesterday , we saw a significant impact on the banking sector , on the
banking stocks , in specific , HDFC Bank came out with its numbers. There is a concern
now as far as deposit as well as credit growth is concerned and deposit growth is not
keeping pace with credit growth. Are you concerned about that?
Shaktikanta Das:
Our deposit grow th, during the last one or two years, has been around 12 to 13% . The
credit growth has been about 15% . Now,  it is not that you get X amount of deposit,
and you extend that X amount as a loan.  It is not like that . With e ach loan that you
extend, money creates money . The money multiplier happens in the market . So, the
credit will always be a little  higher . Now the question is whether it is unduly higher,  or
it has a correlation with your deposit base. At the systemic level, at the individual entity
level, at the moment, we do not see any risks. O ur supervision has become much
more intense. O ur supervision is now an ongoing process . It is not once in a year
annual supervision of banks. So, at the moment, the Indian banking sector, at the
systemic level, is very robust. Even at the individual  entity level, it is very robust .
With regard to  the stock market prices , stock markets have their own dynamics. T he
share prices in the stock market do not necessarily reflect the fundamentals of a
company. I  am talking in general terms, not with reference to a particular bank. T he
stock prices are determined by so many other factors and do not necessarily reflect the fundamentals of a company. You have examples in every sector . Whether it is
financial services or banking or any other sector you look at . There are companies
with very strong fundamentals, but their  share prices should be low , and the converse
also happens. So, it would not be correct to judge the health of a particular sector,  like
banking in part icular, in terms of share prices, movement of share prices and that too
on a single day.
Shereen Bhan:
There is a concern or  perhaps confusion as far as the credit deposit ratio is concerned
and whether the RBI is likely to mandate a number or not. Could you clarify this for
us?  4 Shaktikanta Das:
We have not mandated any number that this shall be the credit deposit ratio. We have
not. At the moment , we do not propose, b ecause the credit deposit ratio is just one of
the parameters used to assess the health of a bank. There are several other
parameters. You have to look at it all in totality. All that I can say is that  there should
not be exuberance in lending, n umber one. Number two, there should be some
correlation between your deposit base and your credit growth. There should be some
correlation. But in terms of hard coding it, in terms of a particular number, there is no
such proposal in our mind s, and we have not prescribed any such number.
Shereen Bhan:
Are there signs or evidence of exuberance that you just spoke of or misalignment in
any particular cases, individual cases at this point in time?
Shaktikanta Das:
Not at the systemic level, not with regard to overall credit. We saw some signs of it
with regard to personal loans, especially unsecured loans. We saw also with regard to
the interconnectedness between the banks and the N BFCs.  So, at the sector, not even
at sector al, sub- sectoral level, in places where we saw a possible buildup of
exuberance or a possible buildup of stress, we had  already acted.
In November , we increased the risk weights and we have acted.  But the numbers as
they prevail today are not bad.  The numbers are okay. But we have acted
preemptively. We felt that if we allow ed this to continue and if left unattended, this
could create a potential situation of stress.  So, we were dealing with a build- up of
stress, a possible stress from actually materiali sing. So, it was a kind of preemptive
action to prevent  the kind of fear of missing out or a kind of what could have become
a possible exuberance.
Shereen Bhan:
Yes, you said that you did not want to wait for the house to catch fire and hence you
acted preemptively. Any other areas where you feel that you may be forced to take
preemptive action? Usurious  rates , for instance , for MFIs . Is that a toll or concern for
you at this point in time?
Shaktikanta Das:
We are monitoring almost every aspect o f the banking and the credit space of the
entire credit ecosystem.  As and when something becomes necessary, we will
definitely act . Our endeavou r is always to take preemptive and proactive actions.
Shereen Bhan:
On the back of the measures that you have already taken and one involving the AIF.
So there are representations being made by that industry, by the AIF,  etc., to the
Finance Ministry as well as to the Reserve Banks saying that perhaps there needs to
be a review of that decision or at least more ti me could be given.  You obviously, I
would imagine, have heard from them. How do you respond to that?  5 Shaktikanta Das:
This decision of the result is the culmination of more than one year of keeping track of
developments in the AIF sector.  It is not as if something suddenly came to our notice,
and we acted. We have been tracking these developments for  more than a year now .
Initially , when we saw some si gns here and there, we tr ied to deal with it on an entity -
based approach. Our supervisors take it up with that particular entity and try to deal
with it on a bilateral basis.  But when we see something showing signs of getting
widespread, we have to act.
Shereen Bhan:
How widespread is the problem today?
Shaktikanta Das:
I cannot again quantify it, but there was this whole issue of evergreening that was
taking place.  So, that had to be prevented.  We have not stopped any lending.  We have
only said that if you want  to continue,  you treat it in a particular  way.
Shereen Bhan:
Provide  for it!
Shaktikanta Das:
You provide for it in your accounts.  So, that is what  we have said,  and some
representations  have come.  They  are being examined.
Shereen Bhan:
But could there be any kind of review  as far as the decision is concerned?
Shaktikanta Das:
I cannot say. It is being examined.  We have got a number  of representations.  They
are being examined.  It is a  well-thought -out decision  to prevent  a kind of new source
of stress  for the Indian  banking sector.
Please  remember  what  was the health of the Indian banking sector  10 years  ago and
where it is today.  In fact, the gross  non-performing asset  has reached an all-time low
of 3.2%.  The profitability  of banks  is very good.  The capital  adequacy  of banks  is about
16.8% . Our stress  tests  also show  that even under  severe stress  scenarios,  banks  will
be able to maintain their minimum  regulatory  capital.
We have to be, therefor e, very careful.  The banks  have to be careful.  The banks  are
careful.  I see a clear  improvement  in the risk management  practices  and the
governance practices  of the banks.  But more  needs  to be done and we are working
on that.
Shereen Bhan:
Would you extend the same view as far as NBFC s are concerned?  6 Shaktikanta Das:
The NBFC sector  is definitely  far better.  The numbers  in the NBFC  sector  are also
very positive  and quite robust , particularly,  the bigger  ones  after the scale -based
regulation.  We have different  regulations  depending on the size and complexity  of
NBFCs.  So, the NBFC sector  parameters  are also looking good and they have
recovered in the last 4 years  in the post-ILFS scenario.  They  have recovered very well.
In 2019,  when I joined the Reserve  Bank  about  2-3 months  after the ILFS  crisis , the
end of 2018 and the whole of 2019,  there was a crisis  of confidence.  There was a lack
of trust in the functioning of NBFCs.  I am happy  to mention here that we work  very
constructively  with the various  financial  sector  entities  and with the sector  as a whole.
As a result  of the efforts  of the Reserve Bank  and the efforts  of the individual s,
particularly  the large and the medium -sized  NBFCs,  that sector  is today  much healthier
than it was earlier.
Shereen Bhan:
Let us talk about  another  emerging sector  the fintech sector,  which  is, of course,  on
an accelerated growth trajectory  over the last few years.  What  is your take there as
far as regulation is concerned,  SROs and especially  given  the kind of explosive growth
that we have seen?
Shaktikanta Das:
There are three things  I would  like to mention.  Firstly, there  are NBFCs  and also banks
which  do lending through digital  means.  So, there are NBFCs  which  are primarily
focused on digital  lending.  That was a growing sector  that needed to be properly
regulated and the regulat ory architecture had to be defined.  We, therefore,  appointed
a committee . The committee  gave its recommendations  and a discussion  paper  was
put out. We got comments . We had wide-ranging consultations  and we have issued
detailed guidelines  for digital lenders  in the digital lending space.
When we did that, there was some  amount  of criticism  that the RBI was trying  to stifle
activity  in this sector.  But let me tell you, the fact that it is now regulated by the Reserve
Bank  and there are clear  regulatory  guidelines , it has increased the trust of the
investors . So, there is greater  investor  confidence in digital  lending.  That is the first
thing we have done.
With regard to the fintech companies , they are not lenders  themselves,  but they
provide technology  solutions  to lenders.  They come out with products,  and they act as
third-party  service  providers  to regulated entities  of the Reserve Bank,  like banks  and
NBFCs.  There also we have issued instructions  to NBFCs  and banks  with regard to
the code of conduct and the practices  that should be followed  by their third-party
service  providers.  The regulated entity  of the Reserve Bank , whether  it is a bank  or an
NBFC,  so far as we are concerned,  will be accountable and to that extent,  it has to
regulate fintech companies.  The fintech companies  are growing exponentially . They
should grow . After  all modern times  belong to technology.   7 RBI is focusing on supporting technology  and encouraging technology.  At the same
time, we want  to have  well-defined parameters  where it evolve in the right direction,
without  creating any potential  stress and keeping in mind  the interest  of consumers  in
terms  of interest  rates,  in terms  of safety  of their money.
We have thought  about  the SRO,  the self-regulatory  organi sation,  which  will be an
intermediary  body . There could be more  than one SRO . Whether  we should have a
single one or multiple  ones , if multiple,  then how many  should  be, is part of a
discussion  paper , which  we have released recently , on the SRO  in the fintech sector .
Our idea is that this self-regulatory  body  will have the fintech companies  themselves
as its members  and they will act as an interface between the Reserve Bank  and the
fintech companies.  Certain amount s of Code of Conduct , business  ethics,  and certain
business  practices,  certain minor  details  can be left to the SRO  to deal with under  the
overarching principle- based regulation which  we will prescribe.  The SRO  will also be
closer  to the fintech players.  He will be in a position to have a better  sense of how
technology  is evolving,  and he will also be able to keep us appraised  that this is the
direction in which  things  are happening.
To sum up a long answer,  our effort is mainly  to see that the fintech ecosystem  grows
and grows  in a robust  manner  in India,  but it should grow  in a proper ly regulated
environment  so that the interest  of customers  is well protected. I t is a kind of
sustainable  growth which  is achieved.  Not that one-off kind of growth which  happens
and then suddenly  crashes.  The growth of that sector  has to be sustainable.
Shereen Bhan:
You talked  about  modern times  in technology  and the Reserve Bank,  and you
particularly  have emphatically  said no as far as cryptocurrenc y is concerned.  Globally ,
we have  just seen an ETF being given the go-ahead but no change in position  as far
as crypto s are concerned.
Shaktikanta Das:
Let us differentiate clearly . There is a clear  difference between the underlying
technology  of the so-called  crypto  as cryptocurrencies  and the cryptocurrency  as a
product  which  is a speculative product.  The underlying technology  has been there.
The underlying technology  will be there.
We are using blockchain, for example,  in our CBDC trial project.  Blockchain  has many
applications . It will grow . It needs  to grow . We are using  it. There are many  users  who
are also using it. Tokeni sation also needs  to grow . Tokeni sation will facilitate  what  you
call a large -value asset.  Any ordinary  individual  who does  not have the affordability
can become a part owner  of a high- value asset . That is what  blockchain will facilitate .
That is what  tokeni sation will facilitate . That is the technology  part of it. The technology
part of it needs  to grow,  but the product , which  is bought  and sold in the market,  which
is traded is a highly  speculative activity.  It has several  downsides  which  can pose risks 8 to financial  stability.  We need to clearly  differentiate . Technology  has to grow . That is
what  I say. We have problems  with regard to the product  or what  is called
cryptocurrency  which  is a speculative product,  and it is being sort of marketed  as an
asset . Let us leave it at that.
Shereen Bhan:
One of the other  issues  that I want  to take up with you is your comment  saying that
institutions  like the IMF, etc., need to take a much more  balanced and nuanced view
of emerging markets  like India.  You said this in the context  of currency  management
and the IMF's  change  as far as classification  is concerned.  What  is it that you believe
they are failing  to perhaps  recogni se or understand the nuanc e that they are failing  to
recogni se or understand?
Shaktikanta Das:
It should be recogni sed that it is not an India problem . It is an emerging market  issue.
They  should keep in mind  the fact that emerging markets  have to ultimately  protect
their economies.  You have volatility  in the international  markets  and in the financial
market.  You have volatility  in the most  powerful  currency.  The dollar  index  at one stage
went  up to about  114. Then it came down to about  101. Now it is holding around 103
and all this has happened in the last 2 years.  So, see the volatility  there.  If that volatility
translates  and causes  an equal  amount  of volatility  in emerging market  currencies ,
where will they go? What  is the safety  net that emerging market  economies  have? So,
emerging market  economies  have to build  up their strength and build  up their buffers.
In the Reserve Bank , we have embarked on strengthening and building up higher
reserves.  Our reserves  are around US$620 billion  at the moment.  Individual  emerging
market  economies  have to insulate and protect  their economies  from the spillovers  of
global  currency  movements  and fluctuations.  They  have to ensure the stability  of their
currencies.  By stability , what  I mean is that undue volatility  has to be prevented.  The
Reserve Bank's  intervention in the currency  market  is only to prevent  excessive
volatility.  This has been the stated policy  of the Reserve Bank for  so many  years  and
I would  like to reiterate  that that continues  to be the policy  of the RBI.
The stability  of the Indian rupee,  if you are trying  to measure the stability , the question
is what  time period you are looking at. You pick up 11 months  and say that during this
period,  the Indian rupee has remained stable . Yes, it has remained stable.  Why has
the Rupee remained stable?  Please  do a deep dive and do the analysis.  The Indian
rupee has remained stable because of India's  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals ,
because of the stability  of the Indian financial  sector , and because of the return of
Forex, foreign capital  inflows . The FPI inflows  have increased.  It is about  US$32.5
billion  this year on a net  basis . FDI is about  US$10 billion.  India is one of the largest
recipients  of the FDI .
The Indian  currency  and our external  sector  are also very robust . With a foreign
exchange reserves buffer , the investors  have  greater  confidence  in India's  ability  to 9 service  its external  obligations.  With all these confluences of factors , naturally , the
Rupee has remained stable.  You have to recogni se it as the ground reality.  You cannot
just pick up 11 months  and say that the R upee has remained stable.  You look at the
two-year horizon.  After the Ukraine  war in 2022,  the Rupee depreciated by about  10%.
If you look at the two-year horizon,  the Rupee depreciation is about  4 to 5%. If you
look at  the last 5 years  or 10 years , the annual  average depreciation of the rupee has
been about  4-4.5% . Even  now the annual  depreciation  is 4-4.5% . We have said it in
our reply  which  is already  published as a part of the RBI, our response to the IMF
report.
What we are doing is that we would  like to impress  upon  the IMF or for that matter  any
agency  to look at these ground realities  and appreciate the challenges  which  emerging
market  economies , on the whole , face and priorit ise them to protect  their domestic
economies . You cannot  take away  that right from these countries.
Shereen Bhan:
Speaking of ground realities , let me talk to you about  private CAPEX and you did say
that there are signs  indicating  that we are seeing an uptick  as far as private CAPEX is
concerned.  Where do you see that? And where  are we in that cycle  at this point?
Shaktikanta Das:
Capacity  utilisation in the manufacturing sector  has now reached 75% and CAPEX is
happening in several  key sectors.  First thing is the government  capital  expenditure
has been quite  strong in the last five years . That is continuing to drive growth.  That is
also generating private investment.  Credit growth in India has been very robust . Of
course,  a large part of it is going into the retail  part of lending. B ut if you talk to leading
banks  in India,  they are also seeing a lot of business  interest  and a lot of active
proposals  for lending for CAPEX . But CAPEX is actually  happening in certain core
sectors  like steel,  cement,  petroleum  and agricultural  products  and a lot of CAPEX is
also happening in startups  and in fintech companies.  So, that cycle  has started.
Shereen Bhan:
The action that you took as far as unsecured  loans  are concerned,  are there any other
pockets  where you believe that there are signs  of overheating where you may not have
intervened yet but you may have to intervene?
Shaktikanta Das:
We are very actively  supervising the system. In t he entire supervisory  process of the
Reserve Bank  over the last four to five years , there has been a paradigm  shift and as
and when we see any stress anywhere or any risk anywhere,  we will act.
Shereen Bhan:
So, nothing  at this point  in time that you believe  may lead to some  preemptive action?
Shaktikanta Das:
It is a moving situation . Let us see.  10 Shereen Bhan:
Let us talk about  the last five years . As the RBI Governor,  it has been a challenging
time. You yourself  in your phrase said a period of great  volatility.  What  do you believe
have been  the hardest  points  to navigate through?  What  has been the most
challenging  aspect  of manoeuv ring the RBI, manoeuv ring the economy , and
manoeuv ring the financial  sector  through the last five years ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Every new challenge looks  bigger  than the previous  one. Let me put it that way. In
2019,  the scenario which  prevailed in the NBFC sector  with a crisis  of confidence in
that sector, activities  had come to a standstill . That appeared to be a very big problem,
but then you had COVID and its fallout . Then you had the Ukraine  war. Then
synchroni sed Monetary Policy tightening.  Now the new flashpoints  in geopolitics , in
supply  chains.  So, every  new challenge looks  bigger  than the previous  one and we
have to remain prepared to deal with such  challenges.  For a Central  Bank,  it has never
been a dull moment  and our endeavou r is to live up to the expectations  that the country
has on us, and the e xpectations  that people  have from us. Our  effort  and endeavou r
is always  to live up to that. One thing which  I can say with confidence is what  the
Reserve Bank  has been able to achieve over the last five years  is to bring about
financial  sector  stability  and contribute to the macroeconomic  stability  of the country.
Shereen Bhan:
You talked about  never  being a dull moment  as far as the RBI is concerned.  I would
imagine that is the case.  But let me ask you about  growth priorities.  I know  that your
mandate is inflation,  but let us talk about  growth priorities  in the context  of the fact that
we now have a vote on account  and then,  of course,  the full budget  is coming  up. So,
what  would  you like to see as far as growth priorities  are concerned?
Shaktikanta Das:
No, I think  it is not appropriate for me to…
Shereen Bhan:
I am not asking you to comment  on the budget  but in general.
Shaktikanta Das:
At the moment , the momentum  continues . The overall  economic  activities  are
maintaining  their momentum  and that's  why we have said that we expect  a growth of
7% in the next financial  year.  So, the growth has to be sustainable.  The rate of growth
also has to improve,  and it is happening.
The potential  growth of the Indian economy  is also steadily  rising.  Our potential  growth
was about  6% or so in the year of COVID.  Then some research paper s published by
the RBI researchers  talked  about  the potential  growth of India being 6.5% . But, now
the growth for the last three years  including  the current  year and next year hopefully ,
and we do believe that it should  be at 7%. If that happens , 4 years  of 7% growth.  11 Actual  growth is, therefore , running ahead of the growth potential.  So, we expect
India's  growth potential  also to move towards  7%.
Shereen Bhan:
Let me end by asking you, what  is the one thing that you are excited about  today ?
Here people are talking  about  AI, talking  about  the impact  of that and so on and so
forth.  But on a wide canvas , what  are the one or two things  that you are most  excited
about  from India’s  perspective?
Shaktikanta Das:
I will not say I am excited about , but I can say that I see some very positive  signs  of
growing confidence in India,  growing  expectations  from India that India will be a
country  which  will perhaps  play a bigger  role in global growth, e xpectations that India
will provide the necessary momentum to world growth also. The IMF has projected
that India's  share in global growth will go from the current 16% to 18% by 2028. So,
what I see here,  I cannot say that I get excited.  I am not excited of everything. One
has to maintain that amount of equanimity more so in a Central Bank . But there is a
growing interest in India. There is a growing confidence i n India. There is a growing
expectation that India will play  a bigger role in global economic growth.
Shereen Bhan:
RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das , always a pleasure.  Many thanks for joining us here on
CNBC- TV18 . Appreciate your time and we look forward to seeing you back in India.
Shaktikanta Das:
Thank you.