Address by Governor , Reserve Bank of India
at the Digital Payments Awareness Week  celebrations,
March 4, 2024, RBI, Mumbai
It gives me immense pleasure to be here to celebrate the Digital
Payments Awareness Week  organised  by the Reserve Bank of India.
Over the years, we have not only navigated through the fast -evolving
technological innovations but also played a pivotal role, as a catalyst,
in developing one of the most modern payme nt systems in the world,
be they large value, retail or fast payments. This has been made
possible by nurturing diverse payment systems in the country,
namely, the bill payments, merchant payments, vendor payments,
transit payments, or recurring payments.
2. We have seen retail digital payments in India growing from  162
crore  transactions in FY2012 -13 to over 14,726 crore transactions in
2023 -24 (till February 2024)  i.e., approximately 90-fold increase over
12 years.  Today, India  accounts for  nearly 46% of the world ’s digital
transactions (as per 2022 data)1. The extraordinary growth in digital
payments is also evident in the Reserve Bank's Digital Payment
Index, which has witnessed a four-fold rise in the last  five years.
3. The flagship of our payment sy stems , the ‘UPI’, has become
the most talked about fast payment system not only in India but
across the world . It is the biggest  contributor to the growth of digital
1 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1973082
2
payments in India.  The share of UPI in digital payments has reached
close to 80 per cent in 2023.  At a macro level, the volume of UPI
transactions increased from 43 crore in CY -2017 to 11 ,761 crore in
CY-2023.  Apart from being a user-friendly  interface and facilitating
QR code -based  payments , the UPI has evolved  to include advanced
functionalities such as offline payments through near field
communication (NFC) technology (UPI Lite X), payments through
feature phones (UPI  123Pay), AI based conversational payments
(hello! UPI) , etc.
4. It is also worth noting that progressively it has taken less time
for reaching tipping point of next 1000 crore transaction s in UPI .
While reaching the first 1000 crore UPI P2M transactions , it took
1668 days (~4.56 years), the latest 1000 crore transactions took just
45 days. Similarly, for UPI P2P transactions, while reaching the first
1000 crore UPI P2P transactions took 1329 days (~3.63 years), the
latest 1000 crore transactions took 65 days  or just over two months2.
The recent progress of the UPI has thus been enormous. Currently,
UPI is processing close to 4 2 crore transactions  in a day
5. There is, however, considerable scope for expanding the use of
digital payments in India.  Last year, we had embarked on a mission
to make every person in India a user of digital payments - “Har
Payment Digital ”. It was aimed at reinforcing the ease and
convenience of digital payments and thereby facilitate onboarding of
2 Data analysed till December 31, 2023
3
new consumers into the digital fold . Since the start of the mission  in
March 2023 , the number of new UPI users added has been 6.65
crore between March 1, 2023 to January 31, 2024. The Reserve
Bank ’s Payments Infrastructure Development Fund (PIDF) has also
further aided  this growth, with additional deployment of over 1.2 crore
digital payment touch points .
6. Trust in digital payments is built on the pillars of transparency,
ease of use  and above all, security . Hence, reinforcing the notion of
safety and security of the system is very important.  With today ’s
message of – “Digital Payment, Safe Payment ” – “Digital Payment,
Surakshit Payment ”, we are aiming to create awareness around
safety and security of Digital Payments . The goal  is to reach out and
empower every individual with the  knowledge and tools necessary to
navigate this digital payments landscape with confidence and ease.
7. Currently, the Reserve Bank, through its regional office s,
conducts Electronic Banking Awareness and Training (e -BAAT)
programmes  across the country. The main thrust of e -BAAT
programme comprises  of:
i) Awareness about Digital Payment Products ;
ii) Awareness about Frauds and Risk Mitigation ; and
iii) Awareness about redress of grievance s.
8. In addition , the Reserve Bank  conducts 360 -degree,
multimedia and platform based public awareness campaigns under
the tag of ‘RBI Says ’ or ‘RBI Kehta Hai ’. Going forward, all the
4
regional offices of the Reserve Bank  will start regional  campaign s to
develop  marketplaces like vegetable markets / mandis  and public
transport infrastructure like auto/  taxi drivers as digitally enabled
clusters in their chosen areas .
9. Historically, the Reserve Bank has been a trendsetter in
ensuring security of digital payment transactions. We were one of the
first countri es to fully adopt additional factor of authentication (AFA).
Since then a host of measures such as EMV3 Chip and PIN based
cards; transaction alerts; facility to switch on and off and set or modify
transaction limit s for all types of transactions;  tokenisa tion of cards ;
restrictions on storage of actual card data ; localisation of  payment s
data etc., have been implemented to enhance the security of digital
payment s.
10. All operators and participants of authorised  payment systems
are required to do time -bound resolution of failed transactions.
Failure to do so may lead to payment of compensation to the users.
Similarly, we have also implemented a web -based payment -related
fraud reporting solution - Central Payments  Fraud Information
Registry (CPFIR) for reporting4 of all payments related frauds.
3 EMV is short for Europay, Mastercard  and Visa: the three companies that created the EMV standard.
4 All payment -related frauds either reported by the customer to the issuer banks / non -bank
Prepaid Payment Instrument (PPI) issuers / non -bank Credit Card issuers [together termed
as Regulated Entities (REs)] or detected by the REs themselves, are required to be reported
to the CPFIR.
5
11. Internet Banking is one of the oldest modes for online merchant
payment transactions.   It is a preferred channel for payments like
income tax, insurance premium, mutual fu nd payments, e-
commerce, etc.  At present, such transactions processed through
Payment Aggregators (PAs) are not interoperable, i.e., a bank is
required to separately integrate with each PA of different online
merchants.  As a result, if a customer wants to  make payment from
his bank account to a certain merchant, the merchant ’s PA and
customer ’s bank must have an arrangement. Given the multiple
number of payment aggregators, it is difficult for each bank to
integrate with each PA.  Further, due to lack of a  payment system
and a set of rules for these transactions, there are delays in actual
receipt of  payments by merchants and  settlement risks.
12. Keeping in view these bottlenecks,  in our Payments Vision
2025, we had envisaged an interoperable payment system f or
internet   banking  transactions . In pursuance of this objective, we
have given approval for implementing such an interoperable system
to NPCI Bharat BillPay Ltd (NBBL). We expect the launch of this
interoperable  payment system for internet banking during the current
calendar year . The new system will facilitate quicker settlement of
funds for  merchants.
13. This measure will further boost the user confidence in Digital
Payments. As a regulator, we are committed to play our part in India ’s
journey  in digital payments .  I urge all stakeholders like industry,
payment system operators, media, digital payment users, and others
6
to take up the responsibility of fulfilling the mission of ‘Har Payment
Digital ’. It is a mission not just for the Reserve Bank  but for the entire
country.
Thank You, Namaskar