RBI Post Policy Conference Call with Press
April 20, 2010
{Transcript}
MODERATORS : DR. D. SUBBARAO – GOVERNOR , RESERVE BANK INDIA.
DR. SUBIR GOKARN – DEPUTY GOVERNOR , RESERVE BANK INDIA.
MRS. USHA THORAT – DEPUTY GOVERNOR , RESERVE BANK INDIA.
MRS. SHYAMALA GOPINATH – DEPUTY GOVERNOR , RESERVE BANK INDIA.
DR. KC CHAKRABARTY – DEPUTY GOVERNOR , RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
MS. ALPANA KILLAWALA – CHIEF GENERAL MANAGER ,  DEPARTMENT OF
COMMUNICATION , RESERVE BANK INDIA.
Moderator Ladies and gentlemen good afternoon and welcome to the Post Policy Press Conference hosted by the
Reserve Bank of India. Dr. D. Subbarao, G overnor Reserve Bank of India will first make a short statement outlining the stance
and measures of the monetary policy for 2010/2011 announced earlier in the day to day. After this the press present in RBI
Mumbai will ask questions. This is expected to go on till a bout 03:45 PM. Those who are connected through the telephone lines
will be in listening mode at this time. Around 03.30 PM the telephone lines will open for questions. Those connected through
telephone lines and want to ask a questi on may please press * and 1. If you should need assistance during the conference call
please signal an operator by pressing * and then 0 on your touch-tone phone. Please note that this  conference is being recorded .
At this time I would like to hand the conference over to Ms. Alpana Killawala from RBI. Thank you and over to you.
Alpana Killawala Thank you Melissa. We have here G overnor Dr. D. Subbarao, Deputy Governor Mrs. Gopinath, Mrs. Usha
Thorat, Dr. Chakrabarty and Dr. Gokarn. There are other senior officials of RBI to answer your questions. I
will now request Governor to make his opening remarks. Governor.
Dr. D. Subbarao Welcome from my side to yet anothe r Post Policy Press Conference. As has become standard practice by
now. I have a press statement which will take about 5 minutes to read, thereafter we will take your
questions.
This morning I had a meeting with the CEOs of ma jor banks where we announced the annual monetary
policy for 2010/2011. Based on subject a wi de array of stakeholders in the run after this policy I have taken
their views on board. Let me first briefly summarize the main points of our discussion with the banks,
before I spell out the Reserve Bank’s Policy Stance.
Banks welcome the Reserve Bank’s Policy Stance, they agreed that the monetary measures announced by the
Reserve Bank today were appropriate given the growth inflation dynamics. Ap art from monetary policy
discussions centered around 3 specific measures, 1) G overnment market borrowi ng program 2) Financial
inclusion and 3) Infrastructure financing. Banks indi cated that the program the government borrowing may
not crowd out private sector demand given the projec ted level of resources in  the system. Banks have
assured the Reserve Bank that they share their commitment to financial inclusion and indicated that they
will work innovatively to promote financial inclusion.  Banks are concerned about growing exposure to the
infrastructure sector. Although they  welcomed the measures initiate d by the Reserve Bank to promote
infrastructure financing by banks, they indicated that there is need to develop alternative sources for financing to supplement their efforts.
The monetary policy for 2010/2011 is set against a rather complex economic back drop although the situation
is more reassuring than it was a quarter ago, uncertainty about the shape and pace of global recovery persists. Private spending in advanced  economies continues to be constrai nt and inflation remains generally
subdued. The emerging market economies are significantly ahead on the rec overy curve, but some of them
are also facing inflationary pressures.
In India economic recovery, which became around the 2nd Quarter of 2009/2010 has since shown sustained
improvement. Industrial recovery has b ecome more broad based and is exp ected to take further firmer hold
on the back of rising domestic and external demand. Af ter a continuous decline for nearly a year exports
and imports have been expanding since October and November 2009. Flow of resources to the commercial
sector from both bank and non-bank sources have picked up . Surveys by the Reserve Bank as well as others
suggest that business optimism ha s improved. On balance under the assumption of a normal monsoon and
sustained good performance of the industry and servi ces sector for policy purposes the Reserve Bank
projects real GDP growth for 201 0/2011 at 8% with an upside bias.
The developments on the inflation front are worrisome. Headline Wholesale Price Index inflation accelerated
from 1.5% in October 2009 to 9.9% by March 2010, what was initially a process driven by food prices has
now become more generalized. Going forward 3 majo r uncertainties cloud the outlook for inflation i) The
prospects for monsoon 2010/2011 are not yet clear. ii) Crude  prices continue to vol atile. iii) There is
evidence of demand surge prices building up. On bala nce keeping in view domes tic demand supply balance
and the global trends in commodity prices the ba seline projection for WPI in flation for March 2011 is
placed at 5.5%. Consistent with th e above growth and inflation projecti ons we are looking ahead to growth
in non-food credit of scheduled commercial banks of 20%.
A few words about the Government’s market borro wing program, even though the fiscal deficit for
2010/2011 is programmed to be lower, fresh issuance of securities in 2010/2011 will be 36% higher than
last year. Managing the borrowing program is going to be  more challenging than in last year for 3 main
reasons I) The option of liquidity management through OMO MSS which were used extensively last year
will be limited. II) Private credit demand will pick up making crowding out a potential possibility. III) Finally inflation pressures will be stronger. Regardless the Reserve Bank will ensure that credit
requirements of both the government and the private sector are met.
Let me turn to risk factors, while the indicative projec tions of growth and inflation for 2010/2011 may be
reassuring we need to recognize the major downside risk the growth are upside risk to inflation. A)
Uncertainties persist in the global macro economic environment. B) If the global recovery does gain
momentum commodity and energy prices may harden furt her which could add to infl ationary pressures. C)
Any unfavorable monsoon rainfall pattern could exacerbate food inflation and dampen rural consumer and
investment demand. D) Large capital flows will pos e a challenge for exchange rate and monetary
management.
A few comments on the exchange rate management, our ex change rate policy is not guided by effect or pre-
announced target or band. Our policy has been to retain the flexibility to intervene in the market to manage
excessive volatility and disruptions for the macro economic situation. Recent experiences has underscored
the issue of large and often volatile capital flows influencing exchange rate movements that go against the
grain  8.06 of economic fundamentals and current account balanc es. There is therefore a need to be vigilant
about a build up of sharp and volatile exchange rate  movements and it’s potentially harmful impact on the
real economy.
Our Monetary Policy Stance for 2010/2011 has been guide d by the following 3 considerations. a) Despite
the increase in 25 basis points each in repo and reverse repo rates in mid March our real policy rates are still negative. With the recovery now firmly in place we need to move in a calibrated manner in the direction of normalizing our policy inst ruments. b) The current episode of  inflation which was triggered by
surplus led practice is now developing into a wider inflationary process. There is therefore need to ensure
that the demands led inflation does not become entren ched. c) The third consideration that informed our
monetary policy stance is the need to balance the m onetary policy imperative fo r absorbing liquidity and
ensuring that credit is available to both the government  and the private sector. Against this background the
stance of monetary policy is intended to first anchor inflation expe ctations while being prepared to respond
appropriately, swiftly and e ffectively to further buildup of inflationary pressures.  Actively manage liquidity
to ensure that the growth in demand for credit by both private and public sectors is satisfied in a non-disruptive way and maintain an interest rate regime consistent with price output and financial stability.
Accordingly you know our annual policy we have made  the following decisions. The repo rate has been
raised by 25 basis points from 5% to  5.25% immediate effect. The reverse repo rate has been raised from
3.5% to 3.75% immediate effect. And the CRR of schedul ed banks has been raised by 25 basis points from
5.75% to 6% effective fortnight beginning April 24, 2010.
We expect 4 major outcomes from the above policy action.  1) Inflation will be contained and inflationary
expectations will be anchored. 2) The recovery pr ocess will be sustained. 3) Government borrowing
requirements and private credit demand will be met. 4) And finally policy instruments will be further
aligned in a manner consistent with  the evolving state of the economy.
The Reserve Bank will continue to monitor the macro economic conditions particularly the price situation
closely and take further action as warranted. As is the standard practice this annual policy statement also
covers development and regulatory pol icies. These measures aimed at carrying forward financial sector
reforms, promoting financial incl usion and ensuring better customer  service. Thank you very much.
Kalpana Killawala Before I start the questions, one request, second a nd third row who do not have access to the mic,
please wait for the mic to arrive to you. Yes.
Participant You know we spoke to the bankers w ho came and talked to us after y our chat with them, they seem
to indicate that even after this round of hikes both in the repo and reverse repo and CRR there would not be immediate hike in lending rate this on top of the CRR hike that earlier plus that you
did in March in terms of repo rate, would you then say that the measures that you have taken right
now are still going to be ef fective in helping tame inflation and inflationary expectations or are you
still in the play where you are happy with sending out a message and then later on if you need to have stronger measures on inflation you will do so, because the immediate impact on the system
may not pull through.
Dr. D. Subbarao I believe that what we have done is in accordance with a calibrated move towards normalizing
policy rates. You know people talk about two wa ys of doing reforms for example there is the
Vaclav Havel, the  Velvet Revolution which says that “you cannot cross a chasm in two leaps”.
There is a Deng model which says that you “cro ss the river by filling the stones”. So what model
we had talked at any point of time depends on what  the situation is and we believe that we must
cross the river by filling the stones. We have take n into account the macro economy situation as it
has evolved over the last 6 months , we have made our internal pr ojections about liquidity, about
growth, about inflation over the next 6 months a nd taken that into account we have calibrated the
policy accordingly this morning. Yes banks have sa id the lending rates may not rise immediately,
but that is okay because we are aware that we n eed the balance between growth and inflation. And
we are also sensitive to the fact that growth is coming from sectors which are interest rate sensitive. So I believe that we have done today is along a roadmap that we have for normalizing a policy
rates.
Lata Venkatesh Lata Venkatesh CNBC TV-18. Dr. Subba rao you have said that inflati on  problem is fairly serious,
a strong statement like the balance of risks have sh ifted from slowdown to inflation, you have said
that India is an outlier in terms of inflation being much higher than other countries and definitely as
an emerging market country. And you have pointedl y said that you are now even now in a negative
year interest rate scenario. Inspite of it the pol icy move is a bit small step of a 25 basis which
means that we are going to remain in a negative real interest rate scenario for practically better part
of the year if not the entire year. How would you ju stify this very small move, would it be that you
think you will move many times  and not just during policy.
Dr. D. Subbarao So let me answer your second question first about whether we will move many times, at this time it
looks like we have moved many times , okay. But the second part of the question is whether we will
move a mid cycle. Let me explain that because this is an opport unity to explain that, we have
moved mid cycle in March and that is not someth ing we had done lightly, we had done that after
considerable thought, because we thought it is a dvisable not to waste a nother 5 weeks till the
scheduled policy. I will not rule  out mid cycle action, because we do not know how the situation
will evolve, but I want to say that that is not so mething that we will do lightly, we will think many
times before taking mid cycle action. So while it is not ruled out it is  not something that is part of,
that is going to become routine. The second questi on, which is more substantive about whether we
still in the negative territory and how do we justify being in a negative territory, I guess I have to paraphrase what I said earlier which is that yes our policy rates are negative, real policy rates are
negative even after today’s adjustment, but we have taken into account th e inflation dynamics as
we see them over the next severa l months. We have taken into account the liquidity in the system,
we have taken into account the government borrowing requirement, we have taken into account the
revival of private credit demand and taking into  account all these factors we have calibrated
today’s policy action. And everything need not be done in one step and we believe that moving in several baby steps towards normalization is better for the economy to adjust to a pre prices
growth…. . Subir:
Dr. Subir Gokarn I think people do get a little obsessed with the headline inflation number 9.9, 9.89 but to also
emphasis that one of the main drivers of our  calculation and our action both in the March
announcement and today is the non-food manufactured  inflation rate. That move from a negative
0.4 to a positive 4.3 in February that was a s ubstantial move and in fact that was from our
viewpoint the sort of unanticipated component or dr iver of inflation which sort of precipitated our
action in March. And now it is at 4.7% so we take that as essentially reflecting the underlying
demand, it is clearly not as significant an issue as  a 9.9% would suggest. Given that that our actions
are not normalization with the idea of comparing or reining the possibility of a demand spike, I
think our actions are entirely cons istent with the situation. The food price dynamics are as has
already been pointed out really not within our control and the monsoons will make all the
difference in terms of whether expectations of m oderation over the course of the year are going to
play out or not, but we do not know where that st ands. So I think the shift in inflation dynamics
from almost entirely food till about November of last year to now more than half coming from non-
food manufacturing that has really been the big cons ideration and that is really what we mean by
the balance of risks having shifted from slowdown to  inflation that is really the underlying driver
that we are picking. Lata Venkatesh Can I ask a supplementary question sir? Post yo u mentioned non-food manufacturing inflation as
the trigger for that what you call unusual mid cycle rate hike, would that be the key parameters you
will watch to take a step which you have considered not a nice step or what other parameters would
you watch which would worry you?
Dr. D. Subbarao That will be not be the only parameter that we will watch, that is the short answer to your
questions. If I ask my Reserve Bank colleagues, they will want me to say that we have a multiple
indicator model, which takes in to account a macro economic situ ation, the returns from various
financial markets just before th ey start with a number of other macro economy variables to study
the situation, but since I do not st udy the model I get informed by them, I get advised by them, but
we will look at non-food manufacture inflation, we look at non-oil imports, non-coal imports we will look at IIP, we will look at credit growth, we will look at the fuel inflation, we will look at
commodity prices, we will look at gl obal prospects, so a number of variables in fact variables that
you monitor that we monitor will be the same okay. So the sense I want to give you is that as much
as we have been talking about non-food manufacture that will not be the only indicator we will
look at.
Dr. Subir Gokarn This number itself has to be seen in a context, and the context in which we have seen it now is capacity. We have seen over the past few months, increase in capacity. We have a survey which
measures this you know we are getting indications  from analysts as well. And overall across the
work capacity utilization is increasing. In this scen ario the threat or the risks of commodity prices
and food prices, energy prices spilling over into sort  of sustained inflation process increase. So I
think that is really one very important indicator for us and that is something we basically observe
on a quarterly frequency because we, the surveys take  a long time to complete. First in the context
of capacity utilization pricing power, corporate pe rformance that we look at this inflation numbers
and that allows us hopefully a more sort of rea ssured, a more confident judgment on whether this
pressure is sustainable or whethe r it is just te mporary phenomenon.
Alpana Killawala Pradeep.
Pradeep One more, inflation that you stated in the yester day’s report as well as in today’s policy that you
have talked about is the asset price inflation. Y ou have said clearly that property rates in Mumbai
especially have gone over the last peak, but you have not taken any steps that you have not taken
specifically and the bankers with whom we have talked after the meeting they also said that they will not increase the EMIs, so rate is not going to increase on housing loans so why it is like that you are showing so much worryi ng, but not taking any steps.
Dr. D. Subbarao What we have done today CRR hike and rate hike, that will have an  effect on asset prices. Other
than that, what you are asking that why provisioning norms, risk why you have adjusted? In the October policy we did the risk ad justment for commercial real estate taking it from 0.4% to 1%.
We looked at the numbers and actually credit to commercial real estate has come down in
proportion terms. So now you do not need to adju st it further. From now onwards please adjust it
then we will do it, now whatever action we take in October is still working through the system and
is beginning to have an impact. Usha, is there any, you have any specific numbers? No, thank you.
Namita Namita from CNBC Awaaz, I wanted to know that for inflation you have done till March 2011
projection you have given to us, is it down the line  like RBI would be comfortable target, internal
target if you have set it, that what is the target number we would like to know? Dr. D. Subbarao No, our internal target for 6 months is nil, then also the trajectory we have given in document, do
not read that as a trajectory actually because we  have to draw a chart, it has to be continuous it
could not be a broken thing, okay, but you know in flation does not move in  things it just moves
somewhat and a trend start you know. So you can s ee that there is a trend but it may not go in a
straight line but it might stay at this level for a few more months and because the base effect was
taken in June, will because of the base effected is set forth on after that.
Participant Sir could you give us a timeframe as to till when do you see this inflationary pressures staying firm
and also you have given an estimate of 5.5% for this financial year, could you give us the reasons
as to what are the factors that  could be supporting that number?
Dr. D. Subbarao You know I do not want to venture trajectory fro m today’s 9.9% to 5.5% but as if we were
studying the numbers and figures we have access to the same thing. So we believe that inflation
will, might stay at this level for the next few m onths. And after that because of the base effect,
because of the supply side factors coming in the Rabi crop will come in, commodity prices might
adjust, demand might pickup, a number of factors might work from both sides, they will work on
the inflation trajectory. About why it has come dow n, you know again first on the food side there is
the prospect of better Rabi crop, there is pr ospect of hopefully a good monsoon if the monsoon is
good that should soften inflation. Commodity prices it is not clear but if global recovery is as
gradual as we now believe it to be, commodity price just may not firm up. So, all those factors that
have an influence on inflation. Anything I missed out Subir?
Subir Gokarn No, I think we the point I will emphasis is that we are looking at March 2011 with the 5.5% expectations as an outcome of many things but most importantly a normal monsoon. So the
expectation of any softening in inflation is ba sed on this outcome that the monsoons will not be
disastrous . At this point we have very early indications  which have typically been the case that a
near normal monsoon is forecast but it is not the aggregate number that matters it is the way which
it is distributed across the country and also acro ss the four months period of the monsoon so both
of these are unknown parameters at this point. If the monsoons are normal, if food production is
normal than we will certainly see a softening of f ood prices, but the same time if the recovery is
consolidating and capacities are ge tting stretched then we would see some hardening of the
manufactures sector pricing. So it is a balance be tween these two forces that is going to drive the
inflation trajectory. And our actions are aimed that  softening the later which is trying to keep a
check on the growth, the pressures on non-food manufacturing prices. So our forecast or projections of 5.5 is based (1) on normal monsoon (2) that the actions we are taking now we have
taken today and possibly take in the future will actually have the desired impacts in terms of
reining in inflationary expectations putting some sort of limits on inflation process.
Alpana Killawala Bijoy from Newswire.
Bijoy Sir Bijoy from Newswire 18, sir you have been stressing on monsoon as the key factor whereas my
MET department is supposed to come out with it’s  forecast over the next few weeks. Do you feel
that it is a time when you could probably start looking at reviewing the policy that you are looking
at and the figures and the forecast that you have come out with sir, would it be possible that you
would look at it in mid cycle?
Dr. D. Subbarao No, that alone will not trigger a mid cycle action. Mere forecast of a normal monsoon will not trigger any actions, okay we will have to study this  with the number of others  factors. And again let me reiterate that we are not going to do a mid cycl e action likely at the sa me time I do not want to
rule it out.
Alpana Killawala Aniruddh.
Aniruddh Governor you mentioned the need for foreign banks to  kind of operate a subsidiaries in India that is
considered merit in foreign banks operating subsidia ries, sir could you kind of elaborate as to why
you feel this way and also secondly you have me ntioned the need for financial conglomerates or
banking holding companies. So what exactly is th e need for this and also in the kind of the
backdrop of the very public spat between two other regulators IRDA and SEBI, how exactly does
RBI plan to go about regulati ng financial conglomerates?
Dr. D. Subbarao Okay, as I see there are three ques tions there, first about this pr oposed study on foreign banks. As
you know under our current policy foreign banks can come either under the branch mode or as
under the subsidiary mode. For what ever reason all foreign banks have chosen to be present in
India through the branch mode, after the crisis there is a vigorous debate internationally on the advisability of having foreign banks on their pe rformance during the crisis, how they should be
regulated, how they should be supervised. We are pa rticipating in that disc ussion. There is no final
view yet, in fact I should say that  our experience with foreign bank s has been less disagreeable or I
would say that we had it is not bitter like many  other countries have had. However, for the
purposes of cross-border supervision for the purposes  of ensuring that banks  which operates in
India, serve India’s interest first. And for the purposes of having a standard model we thought we
should study whether it will be advisable to have  foreign banks come in only as subsidiaries.
However, we believe that we mu st get wisdom and advised from out side of the Reserve Bank, for
that purpose we are going to do a discussion on paper and put it down and we look forward to your
suggestions, Usha anything else.
Mrs. Usha Thorat Yeah this is one of the three major suggestions  in this policy, actually the holding company’s
recommendation for having the bank holding company is a small exercise by the Committee of
Financial Sectors Reform because it was observed that the absence of the holding company
structures imposes the investors and the depositors a nd the parent company to risk in that same to
the parent company’s ability to fund their own co re business and it could restrict the growth of
subsidiary business. Very often what happens is  that the bank itself would be the holding company
than only subsidiaries activities in the same proven to be the risk for the banks itself. So holding
company structure where there is a holding company with various activities as part of the entire
conglomerate is found to be better wa y, but even on this issue like the (Inaudible) 31:23 issue
there is a lot of discussion, but we had asked setting up this working group which we looked into
sort of a legal issues also to be examined. So we will have what is a group to actually work out the
modalities by which a holding company could be se tup particularly a bank holding company. And
it is correct that within the ba nk lead financial conglomerate th ere are entities which are doing
insurance business and which are also doing asse t management business, currently there is a
framework for supervising this fi nancial conglomerates for where if the predominant for business
is the banking business, the Reserve Bank is regulato r and we have the other regulator also coming
and sitting with us and looking at the kind of data  that comes from this conglomerates and we try to
look at the conglomerates as a whole.
Participate Just a follow up on that, so should we understand th at the RBI more or less is in the favor of
bringing in the bank holding company is just a questi on of a structure being put in place if there are
guidelines or which is going to get into instituted at least conglomerated in public domain. Mrs. Usha Thorat It would be better to do it as early as possible th at obviously they will be  taking a sorry we have
not….report but we have just said that we are taking up….yeah because there are legal issues and
amendments which will of course we cannot put a timeline on that, but we could like this working
group to get at that as well.
Participant Now you know the last policy have made give a entrepreneurial important to the fiscal
consolidation a company monetary tightening so th en monetary policy is effective. So I do would
want to understand at this point in time do you thi nk that fiscal consolidation if you think would a
monetary policy timing in your efforts to c ontain inflation and secondly the high governments
spending how do you see that limiting the effectiveness of monetary policy in containing the inflation?
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you very much, you would note that we have made a comment on fiscal consolidations because when we did the January policy that was before the budget, now the budget has come and it begins to part of fiscal consolidations from 6.8% to 5.5% fiscal deficit, 5.5% to GDP in
2010/2011 which is good. And in formulating a moneta ry policy stance we have taken into account
the implications of that  fiscal policy as you know the governm ent borrowing programs, but it must
be recognized that in reducing from 6.8% to 5.5% there were certain one off factors that it helped
for example the revenues from 3G for example that it reduced commitments on 6
th Pay
Commission, reduced commitments on farm waiver al l these issues that you people have talked
about after the budget. So going from 6.8% to 5.5%  was a challenge, but was lesser the challenge
is then what the forward moment is going to be from 5.5% to wherever we have to go 3%. So we have taken that into account and we have also set that the govern ment going forward must keep in
view the need to make fiscal consolidation mo re broad-based not depend only on cash effort but
also look at expenditure restructuring. We have also, we also believe that it is important for us as
an economy to look at the quality of fisc al adjustment as we consolidate.
Ritesh Governor Ritesh here from Zee Business there has been given a lot of emphasis on customer
service it is being said that there have been a lot of complaints have been coming, there is a
committee formed and it has also been said that RBI overall is not satisfied with the grievances
mechanism so is there a trend that private sector bank or public sector banks receive more complaints, either of them all for that matter fore ign banks and what kind of customer services did
RBI actually not right now happy with?
Dr. D. Subbarao I will answer this question and I turnover to my colleague Dr. Chakrabarty, for supplementing what
I have said. It is not that there is a difference, you know we get a lot of complaints, I get mail every
day and bulk of the mail that I get is from peopl e from across the country writing about customer
services because the Reserve Bank and the Governor Reserve Bank is the name that comes to anybody who had a bad treatment or unsatisfactory service at a bank, but I do not believe that there
is a difference in trend as between a foreign bank s, private sector banks and public sector banks.
All banks are good, all banks are bad to the same extent. We have been c oncerned that customer
service must increase as part of the process of fi nancial inclusion. If you want a poorer people we
want people lower income people getting to the banking sector we must make  sure that the service
they receive is good and they will come that is  the motivation for paying great attention to
customer service. And our views on where the defects are where egregious practices are is shaped
by the type of complaints we get. And pensi oners write to us, people who have borrowed from
banks write to us, people who have  taken credit cards from banks write to us and companies who
have borrowed also write but that is less so. So th e idea is not to replace any system but the idea is
for the Reserve Bank to understand what customers _______37.27 address the systems banks have and to see if they are efficient, to see if they are sensitive, and collectively on that basis what
lessons can we draw and what lessons can the banking system draw. Dr. Chakrabarty.
Dr. KC Chakrabarty Customer service what the Governor said is right we do not want to dictate the bank that you give
good customer services, give this type  of service, that is in the ba nks interest for customer service
because it is a very competitive environment w hoever will give good services that will get a good
business, then also people are asking that why Reserve Bank does not focus on this, because one
thing is there, banking is that one type of busine ss like where competition is not as open as we are
regulating it, everyone does not get entry in it. So that is our responsibility that minimum standard of service is given to people, we are not going to show that service is also very bad because we are
showing that also we are not showing that that if customer has any complaint or not, we have
around 30 Crores customers for bank, 85,000 branches are there, everyday we have around 50 lakh transaction is happening, in that there is some  problem in that, we want to know that when
customer is going to bank, listen to the customer and that complain t that are saying that should be
solved in good manner. That system is there or not  so what study we are showing to you, we are
going to make committee that they will see that this  factor would do in one way or not, if it is not
doing the work than what type of discipline is needed in this. So we have like that that complaint is
there but if customer is going to bank, their pr oblem should be solved as early as possible and
indifference attitude should not happen from staff to customer. what changes we need to make, we
have offsite and onsite surveillance in this system what is the difference in that, in bank internal
structure what should be the changes in that and also what Mr. Governor said that bank’s board
should focus on this more. We ultimately want that bank for their own interest should improve in customer services. You know by saying of the Reserve Bank the improvement is not going to
happen, bank will understand that it is through the cu stomers that our business will grow then only
we will see improvement in this  and board should see for that.
Participant Thank you sir.
Alpana Killawala From customer services we s hould go to market, Anup Bloomberg.
Mr. Anup Anup from Bloomberg, I just want to know does India required founder ( Inaudible ) at next
(inaudible) 40.0  and the other question is that if China re values its currency what is RBI’s has set
of impact on the currency, th e exports handling charges?
Dr. D. Subbarao I am not going to make a specific statement on the Yuan, but I do want to say that some countries
manage their exchange rate and keep them artif icially low. The burden of  adjustments falls on
countries which do not manage their exchange ra te so actively. And this happens both because
their imports substituting industry gets hurt and because our exports get hurt. Whether we will take it up in the G20 or not is not an issue that I can discuss, but if and when this is discussed in the G20 Forum we will certainly give our opinion or our  view on the subject. What is your second
question?
Anup  If China revalues its currency on India’s impor ts and its exports and the currency and economy of
India?
Dr. D. Subbarao Yeah, we have any specific model for that. We do not have a model just to track our prospects
based on Yuan’s movement. But I have seen th e numbers. The trade balance between India and
China has changed remarkably in the last seven, eight years. The Chinese exports to India have
grown much-much faster than our exports to Chin a. And that obviously is among other things a reflection or a result of differences in exchange rate management. So I am sure that if China
revalues the Yuan, it will have a positive impact on our external sector.
Alpana Killawala  At this stage if you do not mind we will take a br eak and we will take if any other questions from
the telephone. And if there are no questions then we will come back to you. Melissa, can we see if
there are any questions there?
Moderator  Sure. Ladies and gentlemen, we will now begin the question and answer session. Anyone who
wishes to ask a question may press ‘*’ and ‘1’ on  their touchtone telephone. If you wish to remove
yourself from the question queue you may press ‘* ’ and ‘2’. Participants are requested to use
handsets while asking a question. Anyone who has a question may press ‘*’ and ‘1’ at this time.
Alpana Killawala  Maybe we should continue here for a while. An d questioners who have questions on the telephone
please. Oh there is one. There is one Pranav Kumar from Northeast TV, Melissa.
Pranav Kumar  Question there to Mr. Governor please. May I know what steps that RBI is taking to check the
inflation rate because that is going to ruin our economy (Inaudible) 43.21. So my only question is
that.
Dr. D. Subbarao Pranav Kumar Ji, all the steps we are taking as we have said in the documents and as I have said in
the conference, discussed conference is to manage  the balance between growth and inflation. We
want our policy to support the growth impulses, but we want to maintain price stability. As we
have said our concern is shifted over the last six months from supporting growth to combating
inflation and current inflation expectations. The act ions we have taken in January of raising CRR
by 75 basis points, the action we took in mid-Ma rch to raise the repo on reverse repo rates by 25
basis points and the action we took this morning to raise policy interest rates and the CRR are
efforts to rein in inflation.
Pranav Kumar  Thank you, sir.
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you.
Alpana Killawala  Maybe we will take five, ten minutes from Bombay once again and come back to you, Melissa.
Moderator  Sure.
Roshni  This is Roshni. I wanted to know, sir, what is your view on investment demand and secondly, sir,
what is the realistic scope of huge MSS bond given that you did mention that in your report that
capital goods (Inaudible) 45.24.
Subir Gokarn On the investment question whatever indications  we are getting from th e production numbers, IIB
numbers that capital goods are m oving quite strongly as it coming quite strongly. The two most
significant drivers of the industrial recovery are consumer durables and capit al goods. Within this,
of course, commercial vehicles are playing a very important part. Commercial vehicles have really
hit a truck in 2008-09, they are now recovering quite strongly, they are still not back to the levels
of the previous year. But in terms of the cycles, this is the pretty strong rebuke. In addition to
commercial vehicles, machinery equipment is al so showing signs of recovery, both of these
suggest that investment activity is coming back into  the picture. And this assessment has drawn out
by both our conversations with the financial sect or and our surveys of companies. They suggest
that there is more optimism about capital spendi ng because the recovery scene has been pretty robust and the uncertainties are abating. So we hope that the investment will play significant part in
driving the recovery. And of course the long-term consequences of that are very favorable because
we will get enhancement of capacity. On the infrastructure front, the policy statement does make
reference to the financing on infrastructure, we ar e seeing a lot of activity in terms of financing,
which suggest that projects are picking up, th e activities picking up and this also goes very
favorably to in terms of the sustainable recovery  in terms of larger capacity being created to
support the long-term growth process. So we do see investment as having recovered from the
downturn of 2008-09 and starting to come back very strongly.
Dr. D. Subbarao On the MSS question – I will answer that briefly.  .Whether we would resort to MSS will depend on
how the flows behave and better we intervene in the market. And balance of  payments numbers for
the last fiscal year are not available. They are not available in public domain; they are not available
even to RBI, we only have some tentative numbers. In 2009 end our flows were just slightly above
the current account deficit we expect that deficien t of the surge will be there, but very marginal,
very modest. Maybe about $10-15 billion. Going forw ard, there are different estimates about how
flows will behave and that is depend I believe on both push factors and pull factors. Global growth
prospects, there is a bit of turn in the global markets and the liquidity in the global system. On the
pull side, the promise of growth in  India, the interest rate differentials and the risk free rates of
return in our markets. Should ca pital flows be far in excess of our current account deficit? And
should we believe that that is  not consistent with our stab le macroeconomic  system. If the
exchange rate is volatile we may then we have to intervene in the foreign exchange market. And from the liquidity side if you believe that that liquidity needs to be stabilized, we will resort to
measures available to us, and if necessary, to MSS norms. It is not clear at this point of time that MSS will do any auction. First of all, it is not cl ear what capital flows will be. It is not clear
whether we will intervene in the foreign exchange market. It is not clear whether we will need to
intervene in the liquidity system and it is not clear whether we need to resort to MSS to manage
liquidity.
Alpana Killawala  The next question, Melissa.
Moderator  Thank you. The next question is from the line of  Bijay Shankar Patel from PTI. Please go ahead.
Joyeeta  This is Joyeeta from PTI. Sir, this is regard ing the inflation projection of 5.5%. The Finance
Ministry today said that it will be lower than a projection of RBI, the margin projection of 5.5%.
And same for the growth projections also like in the today’s growth projection is less than
economic surveys growth projection. So is RBI a bit conservative on growth trends and liberal on
inflation front?
Dr. D. Subbarao For all our sake I hope the Finance Ministry is ri ght and the RBI is wrong. I hope growth is higher
and inflation is lower than our projections. But I saw the Finance Ministry statement and what the
finance ministry has said that his forecasts are super imposition of intuition and judgment over
statistical models. So we all know that judgments are different, intuition is different, experiences
are different. And having worked in the North Bl ock earlier I know that the perceptions from North
Block can be quite different from he re in the ministry. So I respect the numbers that have come out
from the Finance Ministry and I hope they are right.
Moderator  The next question is from the line of Sunidh i Ahuja from Indian Express. Please go ahead. Sunidhi Ahuja  Good evening, sir. Wanted to know about the unbanked blocks, still in the country we have 99
unbanked blocks. And you have mentioned that the banks had to submit their financial inclusion
plan by the end of last financial year Marc h 2010. First question is have they done it? And
secondly, what is your plan on the unbanked areas that are still there in the country?
Dr. D. Subbarao Sunidhi, thank you very much for that question. I be lieve we reviewed this morning with banks and
I believe that most banks have submitted their board approved financial inclusion plans. And I will
revert to Dr. Chakrabarty to give some details of that.
Dr. KC Chakrabarty Banks have submitted their financia l inclusions, then there are tw o aspects. One is unbanked block
see there are few unbanked blocks. They maybe in a very difficult terrain either in the northeast or
other places. For that already along with the Gove rnment of India we have  drawn up a scheme that
if the state government provides a necessary infrastructure for bidd ing process we are allowing the
banks to open the branches and the exercise has been completed in Meghalaya, we are trying this in Tripura, but most probably all these unbanked blocks will be covered during the course of the
year or there is a definite kind of action is there provided some basis infrastructure is available. As
regards in the financial inclusion plan not only the unbank blocks there are other villages also
where the banking facilities are not available, we are trying to cover up all villages of more than 2,000 population in the first phase and second phase all the villages. I am only happy to say that
primarily plan which the banks have submitted they said that 10 banks have said that they will
cover more than five lakh villages in the country in the next three years, which is encouraging and
we hope as and when this particular implementation of plan will start we will be able to provide the
banking services to large section of population.
Dr. D. Subbarao I just want to supplement what Dr. Chakravarty said. Much of we are driving this number that
every village for over 2,000 population as we cove red with access to banking services to some
model or the other, we are also concerned about the qua lity of their access. It is not just that we tick
off as soon as the banking correspondent has been a ppointed for that village or a branch has been
opened up, some of the accesses have been prov ided. We are also monitoring whether the people
are opening accounts, how many people are openi ng accounts, whether the electronics are
operational and effective in a real  sense and whether they are helping poor people improve their
income. And that is something that we do not have much experience in but we could study and push that.
Sunidhi Ahuja  Okay, great, sir, thank you.
Alpana Killawala  Gopika.
Gopika  Gopika from CNBC. The annual report mentions that Basel Committee is undertaking the
quantitative impact study and 10 la rge Indian banks are covered under the study. What could be the
impact of the study on the Indian banks, will they necessarily have to compliant with the study? And my second question is a little more specific, wh ich is in reference to a private sector bank
called Bank of Rajasthan. What is the course of action that RBI is taking especially against the
promoters as well as, if any, against the bank? A nd RBI is also appointed two consulting agencies
the law is to work on its report. Have they submitted the report and what does the report suggests
in terms of action to be taken? Thank you.
Dr. D. Subbarao Is it appropriate to discuss specific bank issues in this….? Perhaps we will defer that question, okay. We will answer your first question. My apologies for that. Usha Thorat  We refer to this consultative document which the Basel Committee has put out in December and
the quantitiave impact study which is curren tly going on where ten large Indian banks are
participating in this. Now, as far as the members of the Basel Committee and the banking
supervision and to the extent that our banks are still on the standardized approach, more or less
whatever is the process we will be in convergence with the international standards, where we have certain timeframe, those timeframes is something that one can always  suggest to me or in certain
areas we can add on certain additional potential requirement. We do not even know only after the
quantitiave impact study results are analyzed will the calibration be done or what will be the
implication. There is se veral alternative proposals made. So at this stage it is not possible to say
what it would be. Because you do not even know what  the ratios are going to be. So we are a part
of the international process, we are taking part in the study and this will be calibrated along with
the results coming from the world over in the Basel Committee.
Gopika  Is the Basel Committee among…..
Usha Thorat  No, the selection of these banks is more for a typically in a jurisdiction to give us more important
to get the real qualitative data because it is a huge amount of data. So we think it will be quite
typical, it would not be fairly representative banks,  especially internationally active banks to where
this really applicable. So I think th is would be quite a good benchmark.
Moderator  Thank you. The next question is from the line of Aabhas Pandya from Ne wsWire18 Delhi. Please
go ahead.
Aabhas Pandya  Hi, good evening. The Governor mentioned in his opening remarks that managing the government
borrowing this year will be a bigger challenge compared to what we saw last year. There is a kind of hope in the market that RBI will use open market operations if required to support the government’s borrowing program. What are the Governor’s thoughts on use of OMO for this
financial year?
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you for that question, Aabhas. See, I do not  want to make any specific comment on whether
we will resort to OMO or not. But what I do want to say and I want to reiterate what I said in the statement, what has been said in the printed document which is that, we will keep an eye on liquidity and we will ensure that there is enough liquidity both for the government and for the private sector as credit demand from the privat e sector picks up. Beyond that it will be
inappropriate to speculate on any specific measure because that co uld send wrong signals. I want to
stand by our broad assurance that we are keeping a tight monitoring vigil on the liquidity situation.
Aabhas Pandya  Right, thank you.
Alpana Killawala  We will take one question from Mumbai Melissa. Yogesh?
Yogesh  (Inaudible)  59.44 private consumption demand need to improve to  59.46  support the growth
momentum and outset of the hovering in interest ra te how you are looking for the growth in private
sector should be matched,  which is expected…..
Dr. KC Chakrabarty Well I think the idea there is that the recovery wi ll be sustained, become more robust if there is a
greater contribution from different components of demand. When we look at  last year’s numbers
most of the components are sluggish, government wa s big contributor and net exports, which is the
difference in exports and imports were a significant  contributor.  The fewer the drivers of recovery
the more prestige is because any set of any threat can disrupt the process. So the more broad based it becomes with consumption e xpenditure being close to 60% of GDP, obviously, even a small
recovery impact large component w ill add substantially to the overa ll recovery. So we are really
thinking in terms of its really a desire to see the drivers of growth becoming more diversified
which in a sense will add greater de gree of stability to the recovery.
Participant  Three questions actually two bigger issues, one is you talked about globlaztion moving towards
normalization and your policy document is mostly fo cusing on concerns about  inflation Is that a
view seen that (inaudible) 1.1.1  between the values and that’s pr obably led to without the inflation
you would have probably moved mu ch more slowly towards normalization process as compared to
given the kind of inflation condition, that’s one.  How does the Reserve Bank plan to balance out
the rate action with the overseas inflows that expect ed to come because of higher interest rates in
bands  attracting overseas  inflows it almost looks certain that every time you move rates you move
CRR also upwards to the same direction to stabili ze? And the third one is in the relation to the
bond market. Last year it was an exceptional situati on in terms of liquidity and the expectation of
the bond market you have to start the first auction of the first year with involvement and then the
rates move up and in fact this year the bond markets are probably much more volatile than
probably in the last couple of years you have seen?  Is there some kind of stability that the Reserve
Bank can provide to the bond market in terms of yield, in terms of perception, and in terms of
psychology?
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you. Very clear questions. The first ques tion that you asked which is whether we would
have moved more slowly towards normalization if we were not confronted with an inflationary
situation, the short answer is yes. I mean it is quite  clear that we did not have the threat of inflation
we were moving slowly because  we would have supported growth much more. The second
question about how do we balance rate action with possible flows from outside. As I told you we
are watching the situation. It is not clear how flows will come in, in what form they will come in,
and there is a short term flow, th ere is a long-term flow, debt flows or equity flows or whatever.
But, yes, it is true that the interest rate differe ntial between India and advanced countries will be a
variable, not the only variable in determining the quantum of flows. As I said earlier there are other variables such as the amount of liquidity in the global system, the global prospect, prospects here, risk free returns here, all those considerations are there. But the interest rate differential is an
important variable. To that extent our raising of rates might attract more flows and some flows are
necessarily right. We do not want too much in excess of current account deficit and that is what we
are hoping for and that is what we will calibrate  our policy towards. And on the devolvement issue
I will request Shyamala to answer.
Shyamala Gopinath  Actually, the first option there was a very small amount devolve, and in fact , I think that action did
lead to a very positive influence on the bond markets and the subsequent auctions and as you know very well the subsequent auctions went off well and even in the first auction there was a good bit of cover ratio and even in the subsequent auction. So  I think sometimes actually one has to look at the
demand for that paper and sometimes you know, certa in judgments have to be made in terms of
when you have the tail so I think that was that did have a positive influe nce. And one, I would like
to assure you that we very closely monitor the bo nd market developments and the sentiments in the
bond market and whatever action needs to be taken.
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you, Alpana how are we doing on the time front?
Alpana Killawala  I need 10 minutes more sir, 10-15 minutes. Dr. D. Subbarao Okay.
Alpana Killawala  Yeah, Aparna, and then Rajendra and then we  will take your questions from the telephone.
Aparna  Sir, I have two questions and a clarification one  is through your policy stand you have mentioned
that you will actually manage liquidity from the new (inaudible) 1.6.6,  credit demand from private
as well the public sector As against we are (inaudible)  you have specifically mentioned public
sector demand are there any specific reasons for you that whatever the entities you are referring to
are public are you referring to all the companies… .. My second question is about the exchange
rate. But I feel serious in this the RBI has been more prominent towards a stronger rupee because oil prices did have inflation in price, so we are organizing a (inaudible) 1.6.6  panel which we have
underwent. What is your position on the exchange rate? Will you be more prominent towards a
stronger rupee in the context of import and in flation things (inaudible) commodity prices
(inaudible).  My clarification is on the Para-40 is this  like fresh issuances of government securities
will give a (Inaudible)  since you are having the risk last year. And how did you (inaudible)  is it
fresh paper issue as opposed to additional….?
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you Aparna. On the first question about ac tive liquidity management to support the growth
credit demand on private and public sector what we wanted to convey was that we will look at the
credit demand of the entire economy. It is not as if we were implying that there will be greater demand from the oil companies, etc., I do not think that should be interpreted that way. What we
wanted to convey again is that we will look at the credit demand coming from public sector, larger
public sector which is what the international institutions use public sector to include the
government and the larger government sector. Sec ond, on exchange rate management. There have
been questions about whether we will use the exchange rate as an anti-inflation tool. No, we will
not because if some comfort comes on the inflati on side because of rupee appreciation, that is
okay, but we do not look at the exchange rate as an instrument for managi ng inflation. There have
been some studies done on the pass through, I have been told before I joined the Reserve Bank I keep being told now that the pass through from the exchange rate to inflation is uncertain. When
we had an economist meeting a week ago differe nt economists had differe nt models. The currency
and finance report of the Reserve Bank of 2004-05 has done a study, which states that if your
exchange rate appreciates by 10% that will have a .0.4% impact on inflation. But that is 2004-05, I
do not know whether that is still true today. So the short answer to your question is that we do not
use exchange rate as an inflation management tool. On the fresh issuance of securities 36%, this is about debtor securities of the central government alone. You take the next issuance, take out from that any MSS, any OMOs and you will get the figur es and the figures that I have are 251,000 crore,
this is net supply of fresh securities 251,000 crore for 2009-10 and 342,000 crore for 2010-11, which is 36%
Shyamala Gopinath  Yeah, I think she talks about reissuances. What we mean is a net supply. That  is what the Governor
explained, so it is not li ke new or reissuance or anything, it is all supplies.
Participant  You have allowed banks to formulate the new po licies for conversion of de posits. Does this means
that they can now levy penalty when  there is a conversion of deposit?
Dr. D. Subbarao You want to explain that in little detail?
Shyamala Gopinath  Well, basically we have  more or less the decision relating to premature closure of the bank deposits
and what interest rates the banks will pay on such  deposits will be banks and their customers. But there was one message of regulation that will remain and that was this one. That was the situation
where there is a deposit they transfer a certain peri od and it is before its maturity its closed and the
deposit is renewed for a longer period than what the deposit had originally placed it. In such cases
the bank would expect it to give the revised rate. He re we have set without any penalty so here we
are saying and this was inhibiting in a sense the asset/liability management for the banking, as it
could be a rash of such type of renewal, conversion at the time of in terest rates going. So for this
policy we feel we have left it to  the bank which is now left to them to decide in what manner they
want to do.
Alpana Killawala  Melissa, next to your questions.
Moderator  Sure. The next question is from the line of Vikas Singh from The Econom ic Times, Guwahati.
Please go ahead
Vikas Singh  Yeah, sir, good afternoon. How does RBI plan to propel the credit flow of northeastern region?
Would RBI like to offer bank specia l incentive for credit disbursement?
Dr. D. Subbarao That is for Dr. Chakrabarty.
Dr. KC Chakrabarty You see we are not asking, because we cannot ask the banks to give some incentive for the credit
disbursement, credit has to be self stipulating in the nature, but what we are saying that it is the
state government banks, they should work together to  increase the flow of credit. So one, we have
created the lead bank scheme, create the basic infrastructure and create a particular environment
through which the demand for credit can be improved. So we can only play an intermediary role to
bring the state government and together our lead  bank scheme and thereby improve the flow of
credit no other special incentive.
Vikas Singh  Thank you sir, thank you.
Moderator  Thank you. The next question is from the line of Sunny Verma from the Fina ncial Express, Delhi.
Please go ahead
Sunny Verma  Good evening sir. You little whil e ago you mentioned about the ch anging nature of trade balance
between India and China. Exporters keep telling us that because of the currency issue in China
renders them uncompetitive. Now that your voice is heard internationally, would it not be
appropriate for RBI to take this issue up may be at  a domestic forum or at an international forum?
Dr. D. Subbarao Now, this is something that we discuss with th e government and I am sure that government will
hear you and that has indeed heard the exporters and there is a G20 meeting for Finance Ministers
and Governors in Washington this weekend. So I am sure that this issue will come up. Thank you
very much.
Sunny Verma  Okay, thanks sir.
Dr. D. Subbarao I will now request Subir to sum up the discussi on and give some lasti ng messages. Thank you.
Subir Gokarn  Well I have a lot of time to sum it up, but let me just try and highlight some  key messages as far as
the monetary policies in concern with the bank. One, as we have said clearly the balance of risk has
shifted from growth, the growth slowdown to infla tion and our response to that has been action on
both rate and CRR. There have been questions as ked about whether this ac tion is too muted, too mild to be effective. Our view on that is that while the headline inflation number is getting all the
attention the underlying drivers of inflation are shifting from factors which are moderating and in
fact we just got the CPI numbers for March, both agriculture labor and laborer and rural laborers,
the number is almost a percentage point below the February number so that suggest that would hurt
the indeed starting to moderate as expected from the estimates a bout the rabi crop. But non-food
manufacturing which is really to us a reasonable measure of demand side pr essure has accelerated
not dramatically, but noticeably from a (-0.4) in N ovember to 4.7% in March. And based on that
trend we think that the actions we have taken are value appropriate. We do expect that these
actions will help to reign in our expectations abou t runway inflation, even as food prices are being
driven by factors really outside our control, particularly, the monsoon over the next few months.
An additional consideration which we have kept in mind is the n eed to manage liquidity and the
economy non-disruptively government obviously is borro wing a lot of money this year despite the
significant reduction in the deficit to GDP ratio , the absolute volume of borrowing is quite high,
the private sector is expected to start showing growth  in its demand for credit and together this will
put a reasonable stress on the financial system, whic h needs liquidity to be managed carefully. So
our attempt is to try and balance these objectives. We  want to make sure the recovery sustains. We
want to make sure that the underlying drivers of inflation are kept in check as the one that we can control and we want to make sure that the f unding requirements of both the public and the private
sector, government and the private sector do not cause undue disruption.
Dr. D. Subbarao Thank you very much. You always challenge  us with your questions thank you.
Alpana Killawala  Thank you sir. Just an announcement for the peop le who joined into the teleconferencing. We are
aware that there are many questions and many qu estionnaires who wanted to  ask questions, but we
couldn’t take them. Mostly, these were research and an alysts. I want to tell them that please join us
tomorrow between 2:00 and 3:00 because that con call is scheduled only for you, the researchers
and analysts groups and you will get your chance to ask the questions. Thank you very much, thank
you all.
- = ^ = -