The Vital Role of Internal Ombudsman in Ensuring Customer -
Centric Financial Excellence
(Speech by Shri Swaminathan J, Deputy Governor at the Conference of Internal
Ombudsman in Mumbai on January 16 , 2024)
MDs and CEOs of Regulated Entities , Heads of Customer Service,
Principal Nodal Officers, Executive Director, Shri Neeraj Nigam ,
Reserve Bank Ombudsm en, senior colleagues from the Reserve
Bank and most importantly the key audience of our conference
today, the Internal Ombudsman from Regulated Entities.  A very
good morning to all of you.
1. It is indeed a great pleasure to be here amidst all of you at the
2nd Conference of Internal Ombudsm an. This forum provides an
opportunity for exchange of ideas and thoughts, fostering discussion
to enhance the efficacy of Internal Ombudsman mechanism within
the regulated entities.
2. In my recent interaction with the Chairpersons of Customer
Service Commit tees, Whole Time Directors in charge of Customer
Service Verticals and Principal Nodal Officers, I had highlighted the
significance of investing in the Internal Ombudsman's capabilities
for transparent and fair grievance redressal  as it reinforces the trus t
of customers in the banking system .
3. Today, I would like to take the discussion forward, by talking
about the pivotal role of Internal Ombudsman in ensuring effective
-2-
and impartial resolution of grievances of the customers of regulated
entities  as well a s being an agent for change.
Role of Internal Ombudsman
4. The concept of Internal Ombudsman was introduced almost
nine years1 ago as a forum for customers to obtain grievance
redressal within the regulated entity itself , thereby obviating the
need to approach the RBI O mbudsman.
5. The 2018 I nternal Ombudsman Scheme for banks as well as
the subsequent schemes for other regulated entities mandated
escalation to the Internal Ombudsman before reject ion of a
customer  grievance.  Further,  to strengthen the independent
functioning of the Internal Ombudsman, these  regulations also
provided for tenure and compensation protection of the IO while
advising  regulated entities to ensure that adequate staff and
infrastructure support is provided to Internal Ombudsman.  The
recent framework further enhances  the stature of the Internal
Ombudsman by providing for functional reporting to the Board.
6. In essence, the IO regulations attempt to create an
independent apex level functionary within the regul ated entity’ s
internal grievance redressal mechanism , to act as a custodian of
fairness, overseeing the grievance redress process and to maintain
equitable outcomes  for all stakeholders.
1 Press release dated May 11, 2015
-3-
7. Indeed, t he Office of the Internal Ombudsman in regulated
entities can serve as the focal point  for providing independent and
unbiased perspective to customer grievance related decisions made
by regulated entities.  The Internal Ombudsman is expected to
provide constructive feedback to the regulated entities by analysing
the patterns and identifying the root causes of complaints and
suggest policy level changes required at the level of regulated
entities.
8. However, on occasions,  the efficacy of the Internal
Ombudsman mechanism has be en called into question, particularly
when decisions taken by regulated entities are overturned by the
RBI Ombudsman or the Appellate Authority. Such instances raise
concerns about the efficacy of the Internal Ombudsman mechanism,
especially the independen ce of the Internal Ombudsman.
9. Accordingly, I would like to highlight and elaborate upon four
key areas for the Internal Ombudsm an to focus upon for establishing
a fair and just grievance redressal  process.  Later I will also discuss
the role of the regulated entities in supporting their Ombudsman
before concluding with a brief insight into the intent of our recently
revised framework for Internal Ombudsman.
Independent Impartial Mindset
10. Firstly, I would urge Internal Ombudsman to adopt the mindset
of an independent impartial observer and decision maker w hile
adjudicating complaints. This entails cultivating  a culture that
prioritizes impartiality and objectivity in evaluating the merits of each
-4-
complaint. Moreover, recording a 'reasoned decision'  by clearly and
transparently articulating the rationale behind the resolution is
crucial since it  instils confidence in the customer.
Unbiased constructive feedback
11. Secondly, offering unbiased and constructive feedback on
policy misinterpretations to regulated entities is essential for
fostering a culture of continuous improvement. Internal Ombudsman
should objectively identify instances where policies have been
misconstrued or misapplied and provide  feedback that not only
points out errors but also suggests constructive solutions.
Suggest ways for qualitative improvement in systems and
procedures
12. Thirdly, Internal Ombudsman can also contribute to regulated
entities by providing valuable insights and recommendations for
enhancing systems and procedures  for improved efficiency and
effectiveness in grievance redressal.  In doing so, the Internal
Ombudsman becomes an instrumental partner in the continuous
improvement of the regulated entity's practices, fostering a culture
of responsiveness and excellence i n customer service.
Guiding the regulated entities in mitigating the complaints
13. Finally, Internal Ombudsman, on a periodical basis, should
proactively provide their inputs on the patterns of complaints received, and guide the regulated entity in taking remedial
measures to address recurring complaints. I believe this to be one
of the  most crucial aspects of the role of Internal Ombudsman in
-5-
contributing to a more responsive and consumer- centric operational
framework within the regulated entity.
Role of the Regulated Entities
14. While I have spoken at length on the role of the Internal
Ombudsman, the role played by the Board and management of
regulated entity is also important to ensure the effectiveness of this
function.
15. It is often observed that the regulated entities are materially
compliant with the letter of the regulat ions on Internal Ombudsman ,
but the expected outcome of the scheme remains below potential .
This also manifests in the ever- rising trend of complaints against the
regulated entit ies under alternate grievance redress mechanism of
the Reserve Bank. Many of these complaints escalated to the RBI
Ombudsman could have very well been resolved by the regulated
entity itself.
16. At times there is a perception that the Internal Ombudsman,
acting independently to address customer grievances, could introduce complexities or delays into the streamlined functioning of
the business. As a result, some entities do not escalate the
complaints to IO thereby making a sub- optimal use of the
mechanism.  However, it is important to recognize that the role of the
Internal Ombudsman is not intended to impede but rather to ensure
fairness, transparency, and adherence to regulatory standards.
-6-
17. Regulated entities must a ppreciate that a well -functioning
Internal Ombudsman mechanism is beneficial for all stakeholders.
Apart from reducing  the hassles of customers needing to approach
alternate fora,  it safeguards the regulated entity from  reputation risk
by reducing the chances of rejections of genuine grievances being
subsequently overturned by alternate grievance redressal for a such
as the RBI Ombudsman.
18. Therefore , I would urge regulated entities to make efforts to
reorient their grievance redress framework to support the Internal
Ombudsman mechanism which would ensure smooth functioning of
the overall internal grievance redress  process in  the regulated
entities. Here, I would recommend the regulat ed entities to focus on
three important aspects to achieve the objective, which is integral in
building a robust internal grievance redress framework.
a. Firstly, the regulated entities should focus on providing
adequate human resources and infrastructural support to the
office of the Internal Ombudsman to function efficiently and
effectively . Regulated entities may also explore the possibility
of periodical interaction with front line staff by the Internal
Ombudsman to help them gain insights on the ground level
implementation of grievance redress and plug the gaps identified.  Similarly, a regular interface of the Internal
Ombudsman with Product and Business Heads could also be
held for discussing the grievance redress angle of specific
activities  and products  of the regulated entity .
-7-
b. Secondly, regulated entities should develop a comprehensive
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for grievance redress
based on the inputs received from their Internal Ombudsm an
as also the decisions of the RBI Ombudsman. This is essential
to establish an institutional memory of grievance redress
modalities. The resulting SOP can serve as an operational manual for both the incumbent and future Internal Ombudsm an
and their respective staff.
c. Lastly, regulated entities sh ould aim to ensure that all customer
concerns are thoroughly addressed. The Complaint
Management System  of the Regulated Entities should be
designed in such a way that all rejected or partially rejected complaints involving deficiency in service are auto escalated
directly to the Internal Ombudsman without any manual
intervention, thereby facilitating a secondary review by an
impartial authority.
Recent regulatory development in Internal Ombudsman
framework
19. The Reserve Bank has institutionalized the Internal
Ombudsman framework in banks, non- bank system participants,
non-banking financial companies and Credit Information Companies
in various phases.
20. Recently , a review of the framework was undertaken by the
Reserve Bank in line with the integration of the erstwhile three RBI
Ombudsman Schemes with the objective to improve the customer
-8-
service standards in the regulated entities. A comprehensive Master
Direction  was issued in December 2023 to harmonise the
instructions applicable to the various regulated entities.
21. This Master Direction factored inputs from several sources
including takeaways from the last Internal Ombudsman Conference.
It establishes consistency in various aspects, such as the timeframe
for escalating complaints to the Internal Ombudsman, specific
exclusions from such escalation, guidelines for temporary absence
of Internal Ombudsman, minimum qualifications for appointing
Internal Ombudsman and reporting formats. Additionally, it
introduces the role of Deputy Internal Ombudsman.
22. Anticipated outcomes of the revised framework include the
reinforcement of the Internal Ombudsman mechanism and,
consequently, the enhancement of the Internal Grievance Redress
system in regulated entities, and streamlining compliance
processes for added convenience.
Conclusion
23. Customer service and effective and timely grievance redressal
forms the foundation of trust and reliability that customers place on
the financial system. A strong and resilient grievance redress
mechanism not only mitigates the hardship of the customers due  to
deficiency in service, but also elevates the brand value of the entity
in the financial services space in general and customer delight in
particular.
-9-
24. In essence, the Internal Ombudsman is not just a function; it's
a force—a force for positive transformation, a force for ethical
banking, and a force for a future where financial institutions evolve
not just with the times but ahead of them. By strengthening this role,
regulated entities not only safeguard their reputation but also
position themselves as pillars of trust and stability in an ever- shifting
financial landscape. Let us acknowledge and empower the Internal
Ombudsman as the change agent that propel s us into a future
marked by trust, integrity, and enduring success.  I hope today’ s
conference augments our efforts in strengthening the IO
mechanism.
25. Thank you.
**********