1  Edited excerpts of the Governor’s interview at Hindustan Times
Leadership Summit – 2022 on November 12, 2022
Sukumar Ranganathan
Good afternoon, everyone. I have with me Mr. Shaktikanta Das,  who
really needs no introduction, the Governor of  the Reserve Bank of India ;
and I think we can all safely say that his has been one of the re assuring
voices,  every time when he comes on television to present  his policy,
especially over the last two years in the course of the pandemic.
The Bank has seen us through a really tough phase,  and there are
challenge s ahead , so he and I are going to discuss this. This is a session
where we will be taking audience questions. So, you will find cards on
your table . Please fill in your questions and your name. There will be
people coming across to pick them up  and I will filter them and ask the
questions which I think can add most value to this gathering.
I am going to start with the  big question, Mr. Das, which is the economy .
What is your prognosis ? Where do you see it heading ? What do you think
is good with the economy ? Where do you see the vulnerabilities?
Shaktikanta  Das
The Indian economy remains resilient . You look at the whole world where
the other economies are standing, the kind of stress they have gone
through. The entire world has withstood multiple shocks,  and I call it triple
shocks of COVID- 19 pandemic , then the war in Ukraine, and now the
financial market turmoil . The financial market turmoil is mainly emanating
from the synchroni sed monetary policy tightening across the world by
central banks, especially the advanced country central banks led by the
US Fed . Naturally , the spillovers are felt by emerging market economies,
including India.  In this kind of successive turmoil  the world has gone
through;  the European Union is today facing a recession situation. T hey
are on the brink of a recession , but there are  possibilit ies that they will
avoid that . The United States is holding stable, but there are other
countries also where the growth has slowed down .
So far as India is concerned , its econom y, overall macroeconomic
fundamentals, the financial sector stability , all these aspects remain
resilient . The banking sector , that is the financial sector is stable because
all the parameters concerning banking or the non- banking lenders or the
other major financial sector players are st able. Overall,  the financial
sector in India is stable.  The gross number s are  looking good in the   2  current context . Our estimate is that India, during  this year , will grow by
about 7.0 %. The IMF has projected that India will grow by about 6.8% in
the current year . That puts India among the fastest -growing major
econom ies in the world .
We have a major challenge with regard to inflation. I f you see our target ,
the upper ceiling is about 6.0 %. The last inflation number,  which was
released for September , was 7.4% . We expect the October number ,
which will be released on Monday, to be lower than 7% .
Inflation is a matter of concern with which we are now dealing effectively.
For the last six or seven months, we have taken a number of steps. We
have increased the interest rates,  and the government  also has
undertaken several supply- side measures.
Overall,  just to sum up,  the macroeconomic fundamentals of India remain
strong and resilient . Growth prospects are looking good. India is taking
over the Presidency of G20 in a year which is perhaps the most
challenging year in modern times,  and we are assuming th e Presidency
of G20 with stronger macroeconomic fundamentals compared to many
other countries.
Sukumar Ranganathan
You spoke about inflation, and in keeping with your mandate , one part of
your mandate as Central Bank is inflation management . You sent a letter
to the government explaining the whole process of management of
inflation and why it is still above the ba nd. Can you tell us what you said
in that letter? Or is  that information confidential ?
Shaktikanta Das
What we have written in the letter , I think , anybody can make an intelligent
guess. The law requires that when for three consecutive quarters the
inflation remains above 6% , it will be treated as a failure of monetary
policy  and the Reserve Bank is required to write a letter to the government
highlighting three things.
i) What are the reasons for which it has happened ? What are the
principal reasons behind that ?
ii) What steps the Reserve Bank proposes to undertake to bring it
down below 6% and closer to 4% , which is the target rate? and,
iii) What is th e timeframe within which we expect inflation to come
back to the target level ?
So, we have broadly explained the reasons why it happened. I have
spoken about it on several occasions.  About a week ago, I also spoke at   3  one conference in Mumbai where I have explain ed why the inflation went
up in India .
In February this year , when we met in the Monetary Policy Committee,
our inflation projection which was not different from what the market  and
the professional forecasters were estimating, we projected that ou r
average inflation in 2022 -23 financial year will be about 4.5% . We did
stress tests assuming crude oil even at US$100  per barrel and we found
that even at US$100  per barrel of crude oil , the inflation would be
maximum 5% . That was the estimate we had mad e in February.  Then on
24th February,  the Russia- Ukraine war started, and naturally, it
completely change d the picture. Thereafter , crude oil  hit US$130 per
barrel before coming down to US$120 per barrel . It remained around
US$120, 110 per barrel  for a considerable period of time . Now,  it has
come below US$ 100 per barrel , but it range s between US$93- 96 per
barrel . So, in February it looked like that inflation is well under control ,
and India is well on course to reach the target of 4% .
But the geopolitical crisis , the sudden spike in commodity prices, the
sudden spike in edible oil prices, the sudden spike in prices of cereals,
for example,  wheat . We have surplus wheat , but the price of wheat in
India also went up because we are a part of the gl obali sed world . The
international prices of wheat went up because a lot of wheat exports go
into the rest of the world  from the Black Sea region. So, we were impacted
by major external factors, and the entire inflation picture underwent a
particular change.
These are the three things;  we have explained why it happened.  Other
two aspects , I will leave them for the time  being.
Sukumar Ranganathan
If oil stays where it is , or it  continu es to range round about what you are
saying it will ra nge, which seems like a conservative estimate, right? I
mean, US$95  per barrel  could go up. The problem is we don't know what
is going to happen with the war . It seems to be a war without an end and
global inflation isn't eas ing. T here is already some talk that maybe,  we
need to revise our inflation band, that we  have got a certain inflation band .
Maybe India's inflation target needs to be revised upwards.  What is your
thinking on this ?
Shaktikanta Das
There is a reason why the target has been kept at 4%. There was a n
internal committee in the Reserve Bank which  did a detailed analysis and
found that 4% inflation target with a price band of plus minus 2% so that  4  we have a range of 2% to 6% . The RBI research at that point of time
found and even now that holds good, that inflation above 6% for India
would be detrimental to growth. It w ill be counter -productive because it
will act through a negative loop. If it is above 6% , the financial savings
will be hit . The investment climate will hit . India will lose the confidence of
international investors if it remains above 6% for a prolonged period.
So, any inflation above 6% is detrimental to grow th. Therefore,  6% has
been kept as the upper tolerance band. The fact that we have a tolerance
band between 4 and 6% , gives RBI enough  policy space to use during
times of stress as we did during the COVID- 19 pandemic . Although the
inflation was about 5.0 - 5.5% the Monetary Policy Committee very
consciously and quite rightly decided to tolerate higher inflation because ,
during COVID, the priority was to support the economy by keeping
liquidity easy  and interest rates lower.
During COVID, when the COVID had still not ended;  when the economy
was still facing a lot of stress  and we had negative growth in India after a
long time ; that was not the time to start the monetary policy tightening.
So, this range between 4 to 6% ga ve us the flexibility to keep the
monetary policy supportive of the economy. We decided to deal with the
inflation at a later date that is after things are under control. When we
started the change in our stan ce in April this year , growth for the previous
year that is for 2021 -22 was 7.7% .
Coming back to your principal question, is it the time to change the whole
regime? I would say that 6%, i.e., that is 2 to 6% with 4% as the main
target makes lot of economic sense.  We should not think of shifting the
goalpost because we have not been able to meet it. We remain
committed to bring inflation down to 4% over a period of time; but I also
take note of your point . Internationally, th ere is a debate which is now
starting ; I don't want to enter into that debate so early because we need
to stud y it in greater detail . Internationally, th ere is a debate now starting
that we had low interest rates for a long time and i t was called ‘Low for
Long’. There is now a debate starting th at are we entering into an era of
‘High for Long ’? Internationally, are the interest rates going to remain high
for too long ? Then you have a challenge, and I think every country
internally will have to analy se what they want to do  about  it. If the length
of the high inflation is due to certain structural factors,  then countries need
to look at it internally . So far as India is concerned , I would say that we
stand committed to the current target of 4% , which makes a lot of sense.
It gives us enough flexibility to deal with crisis situations  and shocks like
COVID that we encounter .  5  Sukumar Ranganathan
Your point on whether or not the issue is structural , I think it's a great
point . The question that follows is simply whether the shocks  that you
spoke of , the externalities , are the y unprecedented enough for us to think
in terms of making a change ? Or do you think these are shocks that you
negotiated befor e as a country and can negotiate again ?
Shaktikanta  Das
No, it's too early. In fact, I would not like this debate to start prematurely.
I think it is too premature to enter into that debate. It will only mean less
commitment of central banks to fight  the war against inflation. It's too early
to enter into that debate.  I personally believe and the Reserve Bank of
India also believes that we should not enter into that debate so early in
the day . Let us see how it works out this year  and next year . Going
forward , if we see that inflation  globally persists, and the inflation will
persist as long as you have the geopolitical crisis continuing. Of course, it will depend on the intensity of the geopolitical crisis . On the other hand,
if the geopolitical crisis  sort of becomes something like where there is a
simmering war but not a major conflagration, then things may settle down
because supply chains will get restored . There is friend -shoring. There is
reshoring. Supply chains internationally are getting restructured. The
world will deal with it . The global community will deal with it . If geopolitical
crisis instead of being at a point of conflagration , if it moderates and
remains a kind of a simmering latent war  with some skirmishes here and
there  and i f the supply chains  get mended;  we will see an earlier end to
global inflation than what I said earlier  for which some people are talking
about that it could be an inflation high for long. So, it is premature to start
that debate, and it will unnecessarily dilute the commitment and credibility of central banks to fight the war against inflation.
Sukumar Ranganathan
That is a point well made. I will not go down that road. Let's move on to the rupee. You have repeatedly said that RBI does not have a preferred
band for the rupee -dollar exchange rate, but you have also been
intervening off and on in the foreign exchange markets. Is there a
medium -term, long -term kind of method for this intervention? When do
you choose to intervene? Why do you intervene?
Shaktikanta  Das
Our intervention depends on the day-to-day developments. Two days
ago, the US CPI inflation data came,  and the rupee appreciated by one
rupee from Rs.81.80, it came down Rs.80.80 to the dollar . On a day-to- 6  day basis, there are developments. There are also situations where
somebody makes a statement somewhere, some statement emanates
from advanced countries and that impacts the market. We also study
what kind of flows,  inflows and outflows are taking place on a day- to-day
basis. Many of the inflows and outflows are easier to anticipate, we would
have anticipated them, but there are also some unanticipated,
unexpected flows, both inward as well as outward. The strategy i s
decided on a day- to-day basis within the broad underlying theme, which
has principally three  objectives. One is to prevent excessive volatility of
currency movement. You cannot have a situation where suddenly in a
matter of 2 -3 days, there will be a sudd en crash in the exchange rate of
the rupee. So, the first objective is to prevent excessive volatility and ensure an orderly evolution in the exchange rate of the rupee in both
directions, while it is appreciating and while it is depreciating.
If you recall, when there were heavy inflows during the pandemic year
2020- 21, that is the time we built up our reserves. We were just picking
up dollars in the market and we built up our reserves because we knew
that the reserves which are coming with  great spee d will flow out at some
stage and we have to be prepared for that. T he reserves went up from
about US$400 billion to US $642 billion, which was the peak . We built up
this US$240 billion because we knew that there will be a reversal of the
situation where we will have to provide dollars to the market. A t one point
of time, there was no dollar supply in the market, it was only Reserve
Bank, which was supplying the dollars. T herefore, we started intervening
in the market, which means we were selling dollars.
Now, there w ere some observations made that RBI is using these
reserves indiscriminately, but it's not so. We picked up these reserves
only for this rainy day. W hen it rains, you have to pick up your umbrella
and use it. We didn't pick up reserves just to keep it as a showpiece in
the Reserve Bank of India. Even at this point of time, our reserves are
very comfortable.
So, the first objective of market interventio n in the foreign exchange
market is to ensure an orderly movement  of the exchange rate. Second
is to anchor  market expectations. If the Reserve Bank or the Central Bank
doesn't intervene, the market takes it that the rupee will just depreciate,
and the R eserve Bank is indifferent and agnostic to it. T hat will fuel further
depreciation. So, we will have to anchor expectations in both directions again, both when it is appreciating and when it is depreciating.
Third , a stable exchange rate regime is underlying at the core of the
overall financial stability of a system . That is the principal factor because  7  if you have so disorderly movement of your currency , it will impact
importers, it will impact exporters, it will impact investors and it will lead
to kind of disruptions, which ultimately will result in financial sector
instability. So, the third and principal objective is to maintain financial stability, which requires stability of the exchange rate system.
Sukumar Ranganathan
You spoke of disruption,  and technology and new business models are
disruptors in their own way in the  financial system. What is the Central
Bank's approach to governing new -age financial products and companies
which needs to balance prudence, governance, and consumer protection
on one side, and on the other side facilitate innovation and growth of
fintech in the country?
Shaktikanta  Das
The Reserve Bank  is very supportive of innovation. But every innovation
has to be well regulated when it is commerciali sed and implemented as
a financial intermediary or as a part of the financial system. This has been
a problem area. There were complaints of customer  harassment and
problems of excessive interest rates being charged. T here w ere some
cases of harassment of the borrowers. T his beca me more felt , especially
during COVID , when perhaps because of the lockdown and all, the
unauthori sed lenders started giving pre- approved loans and people
started taking the loan. A t that time, as early as June  2020, we had issued
a fair practices code for  all entities, and thereafter we constituted a
committee . About 6 months ago, we had come out with our guidelines for
digital lending. We have issued a regulatory framework for digital lending
with a principal focus on customer protection, on transparency of the loan
product. We have said that every digital lender must have a Key Fact
Statement  (KFS), which should clearly reflect the rate of interest as well
as other charges including all -in-cost in an annuali sed manner . What
happens is when somebody offers you Rs.100 and asks you to pay R e.1
per day as interest, it looks very attractive, but R e.1 on Rs.100 per day,
that is 1% interest per day . If you calculate it on an annuali sed basis, it is
prohibitive.  We have said that there should be a mechanism  for
customers ' grievance redress al. So, the guidelines are very robust, and
it has been well -received in the market. It also says that there has to be
a complaint officer if there are complaints.  Complaints have to be
received by the digital lender.
But let me also say that, despite this, there are still illegal digital apps.
There are apps which are continuing the practices of lending. W e have  8  had detailed interaction s with the law enforcement authorities . Entities of
this nature will have to be dealt with by t he law enforcement authorities.
Whenever something like this comes to our notice, we immediately pass
it on to the concerned law enforcement authorities to take legal action
and other action s against such entities.
Sukumar Ranganathan
You’re right, predatory lending, especially in small towns, it  is a malaise.
It is also among consumers who are not aware, which is also the way
many of the crypto exchanges used to function, right? I remember, the CEO of one of them came to see me and he spoke very proudly about
people who are investing in cryptocurrency in small towns, and my heart
sank because these are the people who are not aware of the risks. What
about the CBDC? There’s a pilot, which is now going on.  Tell us a little
more about this . Fundamentall y, is there a functional benefit to digital
currencies? Or is it one of those nice- to-have things?
Shaktikanta  Das
No, it has a fundamental benefit. The world is changing. The way
business is done is changing. Technology  is evolving very fast. You have
to keep pace with the time.  That is a kind of motherhood way of looking
at the whole issue. M ore specifically, the printing of notes, currency notes,
and paper notes, involves cost . It involves the cost of printing, cost of
paper, cost of logistics, cost of storage, and the entire logistics and
everything, it requires a lot of effort s and a lot of cost. Going forward,  this
will be much less costly compared the paper currencies. That is number one. Secondly, this is something which will become very important for
cross- border transactions and cross- border payments. Today, when
money is remitted or transferred on a cross- country basis, according to a
World Bank report, the average charges are about 6%. W hen C BDC
comes in, let us say in a group of countries,  the cost will be practically
very marginal. It will be the cost of overheads of our system  and their
system . It will be substantially minimi sed and it will be instantaneous. Of
course, you may ask a question that even  now under UPI, we are working
for real- time transfer of money. In fact, between India and several other
countries like Singapore, the United Arab Emirates,  and other Gulf
countries,  the UPI is already being linked so that the real -time transfer of
money takes place between India and those countries. Y ou may say that
this is happening , but UPI is a payment system, whereas this is a
currency system. UPI facilitates the payments to take place.  Here the
currency itself  - the currency issued by the Central Bank will get
transmitted. This is less costly, it will facilitate international payments,  9  cross border payments, and it will be good for exporters and importers. I
think the future belo ngs to technology. T here could be a time whe n half
the world or more than half the world would be on digital currency and
you cannot be on paper currency.  You have to be moving in tune with the
changing technological developments.
Sukumar Ranganathan
Moving on to a slightly more macro question. Before the pandemic, there
was this consistent debate, not just in India but in many parts of the world
on the autonomy and independence of c entral banks and the role of
government . What we have  seen since is,  central banks and
governments increasingly hav e to act in concer t. What are your views on
this?
Shaktikanta  Das
When I joined the Reserve Bank of India on the 12th of December 2018 ;
on the first day, I had a press conference in which I had said that the
monetary authority namely the Reserve Bank,  and the government, which
is the fiscal authority, there has to be coordination as both are working in
the interest of the economy. B oth ar e in the business of ensuring the
public good. T hese two institutions need to talk to each other  and engage
with each other. The process of consultation has to prevail because both
are dealing with the economy.  Regarding  Central Bank autonomy, let me
tell you very clearly that so far as India is concerned, what does autonomy
mean? Autonomy means autonomy in decision- making. There is an
interdependence of the government with the RBI and the RBI with the government, the government needs the RBI for financial inclusion, digital
payments and for so many things.  The Reserve Bank also needs the
government because we need legislative changes.
Let me also mention that many legislative changes have been carried out
over the last 3 – 4 years. W e got additional  powers to regulate the NBFCs ;
to deal with the problem of the urban cooperative banks and to regulate
housing finance companies, which were earlier regulated by the National Housing Bank. T hey were transferred to the RBI because there is no
difference bet ween a housing finance company and a n NBFC.  So, we
also need the support of the government. U ltimately, if the economy has
to do well, both fiscal and monetary authorities will have to work in close coordination, and this coordination  and this conversation, let me mention,
happens all over the world. It  is not something peculiar to India. I t
happens all over the world,  but various kind of extraneous noises come
from time to time . There is close coordination, there is a constant  10  engagement between the treasury and the monetary authority; between
the finance ministries and the monetary authorities the world over . It is
nothing unusual, and especially in COVID times, even the conventional
purists have now recogni sed that to deal with stressful situations like the
COVID, there has to be proper coordination between the monetary and
the fiscal authorities . Coordination and engagement do not mean a
compromise of autonomy. Nobody interferes with each other's work, but
we share our views. Look at the issue of inflation. While we have taken
several monetary measures by controlling liquidity, raising interest rates and several other measures;  the government has undertaken supply- side
measures in terms of bringing down the taxes on petrol and diesel,
reducing the import duty on edible oil  and pulses, which have had a
positive impact on inflation. So, there is an interdependence between the two.
Sukumar Ranganathan
You have to act in concert. Thank you very much, Governor . It was a
pleasure having you here. I am sure our audience is going back feeling
very secure that we have a stable hand at the wheel. Thank you.
Shaktikanta Das
Thank you very much .