1 Governor’s interaction with audience after his 17th K P Hormis
Commemorative Lecture on March 17, 2023 (Edited Excerpts)
Governor, Shri Shaktikanta Das delivered the 17th K P Hormis  Commemorative
Lecture on ‘G20 for a Better Global Economic Order during India’s Presidency’  at
Kochi  on March 17, 2023. After the lecture, the Governor interacted with the audienc e.
The edited excerpts of the interaction are placed below.
Moderator :
Thank you, sir. The forum is open to questions. If you have any, kindly raise your hand.
Gayathri Suresh, FISAT Business School:
Good afternoon,  sir. My name is Gayathri Suresh. I am an MBA student from FISAT
Business School , Angamaly . Sir, my question is that your signature is one of the most
recogni sed ones as it is on every single currency note. How do es it feel aside from the
power and authority that comes with it to have your signature on every note, sir? S ince
digital transactions are rising and increasing by the hour , is the Governor's signature
under threat, sir?
Shaktikanta Das:
I do not see the signat ure on the note as a s ign of power . I see it as a sign of
responsibility . If you take out any note other than one rupee note, what does it say ? It
says I promise to pay the bearer of  this note a sum of rupees so much. This sovereign
has given that power to the Reserve Bank of India and on behalf of the Reserve Bank
of India, I  am assuring every citizen or every person who holds a particular piece of a
currency note, let's say Rs .10 or Rs.100 or Rs.500,  I promise on behalf of  the Reserve
Bank to pay him that much money . In other words , if tomorrow he comes to the
Reserve Bank o r he goes anywhere, he will get that much value of goods and services .
So, it is a tremendous responsibility c ast upon the Governor of the Reserve Bank and
the Reserve Bank as an institution.
The underlying behind this is a huge responsibility to ensure financial stability and monetary stability in the country , because only when you have financial stability  and
monetary stability in the country , then the value of the rupee remains where it is . So
as I said,  the signature is not a sign of  power . It is a sign of responsibility .
Gayathri  Suresh:
Thank you, sir.
Suchitra Menon, Irish Linen:
Good evening, sir. I am Suchitra Menon. I  am the CEO of an Irish Linen Manufacturing
Company . My question is on demoneti sation. Demoneti sation was a major policy
decision that impacted profoundly our economy , and you were  the face of the
Government during this massive drive that involved 1 billion people.  How do you think
this has a ffected or shaped  RBI's approach to policy matters and its role in promoting
economic growth and stability in India?  2
Shaktikanta Das:
So far as RBI's role and responsibility are concerned,  over a period of time, the RB I is
confronted with various challenges . I do  not want to go into the details of
demonetisation, demoneti sation  was an exercise,  as it was explained at that time,
against counterfeit currency that is against fake currency notes . It was a measure
against  unaccounted money  and unaccounted wealth. It was a measure,  which also
had the objective of  promoting digital payments . It had multiple objectives .
The Reserve Bank, as the issuer of the currency notes , naturally , had the responsibility
of printing and supplying these notes to the market and the Reserve Bank did its job
at that time admirably.  In fact, there is nothing called demoneti sation in the official
lingo . It was the withdrawal of the legal tender character of those notes .
So, that was an issue which the Reserve Bank had to deal with. From time to time , the
Reserve Bank deals with various issues . We had COVID, which had its fallout , and
the Reserve Bank had to deal with it . We had the war in Ukraine and its spillover and
the fallout , which we had to deal with .
So, in a country  as complex as India, in a world that is so dynamic and fast-changing,
the underlying theme of all Reserve Bank's policies, as I mentioned earlier, is always to ensure financial stability. When we are increasing interest rates  or reducing interest
rates, or we are taking any other measure, the overarching theme is to maintain financial stability. W ith regard to the growth, the Reserve Bank is at the forefront of
ensuring greater financial inclusion,  greater digital payments , making credit available
to the last person in the queue. W hen we take our interest rate decisions  and other
decisions , we are always mindful of the growth aspects . So, it is a kind of all -
encompassing function .
Demoneti sation, what you call as demoneti sation, is one of the sort s of challenges
which the Reserve Bank dealt with, as it had dealt with several challenges before that ,
and as it is continuing with several challenges after that , and as it will continue to deal
with future challenges . I can assure you, the Reserve Bank will deal with it to the best
of its capability , and our job is to ensure financial stability . We remain committed to
that.
Ravi Rajagopalan, Boson Systems:
Good afternoon, sir. This is  Ravi Rajagopalan. I am the MD and CEO of Boson
Systems. We run one of the national payment systems that the Reserve Bank of India
has authori sed and regulates. So, that was a fascinating talk and I want ed to pick up
on something with respect to the contagion that is spreading from the United States to
other parts of the world.  So, anyone who is remotely familiar with how Indian banking
has progress ed in the last 10 years would note that we have not had such occurrences ,
and where there has been contagion that def ence with which the  Reserve Bank of
India has been able to contain it and manage it without hurting depositors , without
hurting credit is remarkable. Given India's presidency of the G 20, can you throw some
light on whether in addition to legal convergence whether there is any mo ve for the 3 Reserve Bank of India to make available its substantial supervisory expertise to your
fellow counterparts in the Central Banks in the United States and elsewhere? Someone just g ave me an interesting statistic , since you took over as a Governor of
the Reserve Bank, and I am sure i t has nothing to do with it, 10 banks failed in the
United States . So, while you can not comment on what happens there, but can you
throw some light on whether or not any moves are th ere to tap India's substantial
regulatory expertise in this area where stress is a common factor that all these
economies face in terms of transferring this expertise to other Central Banks?
Shaktikanta Das:
The first line of defence  for any bank or any financial institution is the management of
that bank , then you have the auditors w ho are the second line of defence.  At the third
or fourth level , the supervision, that is the Reserve Bank of India or the supervisory
authority in the respective countries that would come.
Our job is t o keep on supervising and keep on highlighting the risks , highlighting the
challenges  which are emerging. We continuously do stress tests . We identify any
potential buildup of risk in every institution, and we constantly engage with the
management of the banks through our supervisors .
As I mentioned in my speech that we monitor the root causes of vulnerabilities . We
are now doing a much deeper dive into the business models of the banks which may not be sometimes to the liking of the banks . They may be feeling that we are interfering
in their commercial operations . We are not . We do not tell them you do this , you do
that. We don't tell them .
We sensiti se them that  we have analy sed your bank . We find that this problem is
developing in your bank . Has this  problem been considered by you ? If it has not been
considered , please examine this matter  and take it to your Board. Let the Board take
a decision.  If a risk is building up , we sensiti se the bank . The bank's Risk Management
Committee is supposed to focus on that . We do not tell what the banks need to do
because the banks know better what they have to do w ith their interest  and the interest
of their stability .
Now so far as sharing experiences is concerned,  we learn from each other . It is not as
if we do  not learn from others . We engage with several other banks , and we learn from
each other  in matters of regulation, supervision,  etc. There is a constant sharing of
information and we take this forward.
We have the arrangement of the Financial Stability Bo ard which again reports to the
G20.  India is a part of the Financial Stability Board also . Lot of deliberation go es on in
this Financial Stability Board.
We have the Bank for International Settlements  (BIS) , of which India is a member .
Every two months  at BIS , all the Governors  meet and discuss the global situation. We
discuss what is happening in each of the countries , and there  is a lot of experience
sharing.  So, there is a constant sharing of information, which goes on.
We do not have the full detai ls of what exactly has happened in the US, we are
assessing the situation from the outside but some trends are now emerging as to what 4 is likely to have happened.  I am sure the US authorities will deal with this issue and
the US Fed and the Treasury have c ome out very strongly . They are dealing with the
situation and they will deal with it .
So far as India is concerned, the stress tests  are done by the RBI on a continuous
basis. S tress tests are done not only about the individual entities  but also to the overall
system  like, what are the systemic stresses  which are building up . We keep on doing
these stress tests using various parameters . In several scenarios , like in a baseline
case , severe stress situation and a very severe stress situation. W e draw various
parameters and do stress testing  for each of these situations,  what is likely to happen
if these, these, th ese things deteriorate and accordingly  advance action has to be
taken proactively . So, the Reserve Bank is constantly engaged with all the banks and
a lot of improvement has happened over the last few years . It is a continuous exercise.
There is no room for complacency . We will continue our exercise.
Moderator:
We will take one final question.
Sreekanth, ESAF  Small Finance Bank:
Good evening, sir.  Sir, I am Sr eekanth here. I h ead the marketing for ESAF  Small
Finance Bank. Sir, my question is , now everybody is talking about sustainability and
ESG. So, what is the role RBI is looking at in encouraging sustainable banking
practices in India?
Shaktikanta Das:
I will give a very short answer to that . I would encourage you to have a look at the
discussion paper , which we released last year in July or August on climate change
and ESG. We received a large number of feedback , and comments from vario us
stakeholders and based on that , we have started issuing instructions . In the last
monetary policy , in the first week of February , we have given out  certain directions and
instructions , and advice to the banks . So, we will take this forward .
Basically, as a regulator , it is our responsibility to ensure that the provision of finance
is done in a sustainable manner . The risks arising out of climate change are properly
understood and are factored into the lending practices of the banks and NBFCs . The
banks also themselves must build, must be aware of the risks involved in every lending
and provide adequate risk management or mitigation measures in all their actions ,
whether in individual loans or sectoral loans . So, we are taking this forward. We have
just c ommenced our  activities last year . We have become a member of  what is called
the NGFS,  that is the Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the
Financial System . So, we have become a member of that and we are now taking it
forward .
Going forward , we will have to focus on this and banks should be sensitive to the risks
arising out of climate change and what impact it will have on their balance sheet
accordingly , the banks need to take appropriate mitigation measures .
5
Moderator:
Thank you, sir. I would now like to request Mr. Shyam Srinivasan  – MD and CEO,
Federal Bank  to deliver the vote of thanks .
Shyam Srinivasan:
So, I will bring this to a close. I know I am running short on time. I just want to reassure
the audience, the Governor, and our friends from RBI, first, thank you for being here
this evening. It  is such a privilege and also to ensure that we will follow both RBI and
also the three R's of the Governor, resilient, we will reassure you, and we will be
resolute. Thank you very much. Thank you, Governor.