1 Edited Transcript of the Governor’s Interview with NDTV Profit at the
World Economic Forum 2024 at Davos on January 1 8, 2024
Shaktikanta Das:
India today deserves a very much more serious  look because of all that is happening
in India. The interest this time around in India is genuine. There is a lot of International
confidence on the Indian growth story , on the technology story built around India,  on
the growth prospects of India, and the stability that is the macroeconomic and financial
sector stability that India offers. So, my message if you see it in that sense is that we
need to really step back and look at the business opportunities in India because this
is the right time to get into the Indian business ecosystem.
NDTV Profit :
Coming back to my point in terms of the India growth story, how do you see India's growth with global inflation also rising? How do you see that panning out in the next 5 years, 10 years and as a matter of fact if you can give?
Shaktikanta Das:
The prospects of India's growth are very robust. Just imagine the last three years
including the current year  contrary to the contraction of 5.8% that we witnessed in
2021. The next 3 years ' growth rate was 9.1% , 7.2% and the current year we expected
is 7.3 %. In fact, last year in October 2023, contrary to our projection of 6.5% growth
which we had given in the previous monetary policy w hen I said in an event in Mumbai
I would not be surprised if growth in the current year is 7%. There was a lot of cynicism
around that p erhaps RBI had  been over -optimistic at that time when I said 7%, but
subsequently , the National Statistical Office (NSO) has come out with a figure of 7.3%.
Growth prospects are very good mainly due to the structural reforms which have been
undertaken in recent years, structural reforms in matters of taxation, in matters of banking, in matters of let us say giving a new feeling to the manufacturing sector in
particularly in making a vast difference in the ease of doing business in India.
So, considering the structural reforms which have been done and the macroeconomic
and financial stability which we as a central bank have been able to provide during the
years of multiple overlapping shock s, unprecedented crises like the health crisis
COVID,  geopolitical crisis  Ukraine war , new flashpoints in the global geopolitics are
coming up.
Despite that, the Indian banking sector has made a remarkable recovery and the
Indian banking sector is perhaps  at one of its best in recent years, the financial sector
is very stable. The external sector is also stable notwithstanding that the global growth is slowing down. India's  services sectors are doing well and these are not one- off 2 developments. These are not temporary developments these are happening because
of the structur al reform measures that we have undertaken.  For example, look at the
regulatory architecture of the financial sector . We have given a lot of focus  to the
regulatory architecture. The enti re governance system in both private and public sector
banks today is a new financial architecture. We issued the regulatory guidelines  along
the NB FCs, we issued digital lending guidelines along the digital lending.
All these are the building blocks and t hey are providing the required foundations for
the belief in the fact that India's growth momentum will be maintained in the future
years . When I say that I see durable signs of India's growth momentum being
maintained, it is not a one-off comment. It is based on a lot of in- house research and
analysis.
NDTV Profit :
Thank you for the comprehensive answer. Y ou mentioned in your earlier interviews
that we live in a very volatile, uncertain, very complex and ambiguous  world so  what
are the pri mary risks that you  as an institution are overseeing on very critical length
from a vertical length?  What are the kind of risks r ight now you are foreseeing that will
be out and might impact  India's  growth story?
Shaktikanta Das:
This is  from the external side,  the headwinds emanating from outside the country, the
geopolitics, the geo- economic fragmentation, their impact on the global supply chains
which have not yet normalized,  and I just mentioned that new flashpoints in global
geopolit ics are coming up and putting further restrictions on supply chains.
There are new restrictions being put by some countries on the flow of capital, on the
flow of technology, and the flow of goods and services. T here is  geoeconomic
fragmentation and w hat shape it will take again is linked to the emerging geopolitical
scenario. The financial conditions which we see in the advanced countries
notwithstanding,  the fact that this time around the global economy one year ago or two
years ago everybody thought that there w ould be a hard landing in all the advanced
economies has not happened. Countries this time have r esponded to the challenges
far better. So, a hard landing is looking unlikely at this point of time. I ndividual
economies have run and responded far better to the global crisis, but the point remains
that global  growth is slowing down. So from the external side,  how the geopolitical
dynamics are likely to play out, the slowing global growth will have an impact on
external demand for every country and the geoeconomic fragmentation and persisting supply chain issues and the financial conditions  how they  will evolve.
Internally so far as the financial s ector and the mac roeconomic scenario is concerned,
we are very proactive in dealing with them. We clos ely supervise the financial sector  3 whether it is banks,  or it is nonbanking finance companies or various segments of the
financial sector which is regulated by us other than capital markets and the insurance
sector. We have substantially improved our  supervision.  I am not going into one
improvement , it is already in the public domain.  Last week I have spoken at length
about it so I am not going into that . But today our emphasis and the focus of our
supervision and our forward -looking  approach is to identify the crisis, identify a
possible risk before it actually materialises and then take preventive measures to
prevent any risk build- up. There are examples of it .
Internally there will be problem s, but let me mention one area which is always on top
of our agenda at the moment , the dynamics of food inflation which is subject to leading
to global supply chain issues and also which is linked to unexpected weather events. Food inflation can be very volatile dependi ng on some weather events. We saw it last
year, there were heavy rains and floods and then we had the vegetable prices going
on and that impacted the headline inflation. That is something which is not under our
control, but we have to respond to it  and that is a matter which is on top of our table
whenever we try to sort of analy se the situation.
NDTV Profit :
In Davos one of the lines  of thinking or rather buzz is around emerging technologies
and you have been heading an institution that is l ooking at the f inancial sector i n India,
so what  is the future of cry ptocurrencies in India ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Very bad!
On a serious note,  let me say it and I have said time and again. I will not shape the
policies for all times to come, but as far as I can see in the foreseeable f uture and the
way crypto currency is evolving all over the world i t has huge risks. S ome people are
celebrating it as the party has just begun. It began 4, 5 years ago t hen it collapsed.
Now again the party has started, but ther e are huge risks  particularly f or emerging
market economies , for developing economi es because it can impact your financial
stability, it can impact your currency stability and your monetary system. It has issues
of money laundering and terror financing and al l that . It ha s the potential of a currency -
like product , so, there are huge risks around it  as there is no underlying. It is not a
currency first of all, but it has the potential to become a currency in which event it can
occupy a part of your payment system . People say that it is too far fetched, but please
take my word, it can happen. It can happen sooner than peopl e are expecting and also
have a later impact on our banking system.
There are various risks built around it. It  has no underlying.  Every asset , if you ca ll it
an asset,  has a corresponding liability. Cryptocurrencies , whose liability it is , nobody 4 knows . Having said that let me say that the underlying technology, blockchain has
many applications. T hey can be put to excellent use and already it is being used in the
logistics companies, in the financial sector, our C BDC (the Central Bank D igital
Currency ) the e-Rupee;  which we have launched,  in fact , just two la wns further down
on a pilot basis at the moment.  It is on displays of the demonstration along with the
UPI. We are using blockchain technology, which has a lot of applications. The
application built around technology has got lot of potential and that needs to be
capitali sed and utili sed. But cryptocurrency as a product is highly s peculative and my
opinion is that and the Reserve Bank's opinion is that considering the big risks around
it countries like India should be very, very careful. I said  it in one event in Mumbai last
week t hat we should not have a situation like the Tulip Mania. W e should not again
have something called a Cryptomania kind of crisis . I will stop here.
NDTV Profit :
I take on the word UPI that you just mentioned. So, UPI  is something that has
revolutioni sed the digital payment ecosystem in India and it  is something that the
Honorable Prime Minister has offered it towards the Global South. The kind of
transactions  India has seen it is more than the US and China put together. So, what is
the RBI doing in t erms of pr omoting its adoption externally?
Shaktikanta Das:
UPI has been a game- changer. It has now become kind of an international  model and
there is a lot of interest from many countries. We have signed the M OUs with several
countries , but I cannot mention their names, to facilitate the setting up of similar
systems in their  countr ies. In some countries , we are also providing the required
assistance to develop their own internal UPI -like fast payment system s and the idea
is to link up the fast payment system of India with the fast payment system of other countries. We have done it in the case of Singapor e, the UPI of India and the P ayNow
of Singapore.  The transactions across the  countries can happen on a real -time basis
and a similar exercise is already underway with many other countries . It can be a game
changer because cross -border payments can become much easier , more cost-
effective and faster. So,  that is our endeavou r.
The NPCI has set up a  subsidiary , which is sp ecifically dedicated to take UPI
International , called NPCI International Limited.  This company is specificall y focusing
on taking UPI International. T here is a lot of enthusiasm built around UPI. Some of the
use cases are those who have travel led in India or those who are from India. T oday ,
if you go to a small shop or a vegetable vendor or a  roadside chaiwallah that is a tea
stall or something like that  they all are on UPI because it is so much easier and
everybody has a QR code.  We have made it interoperable across banks irrespective
of in which bank you have your account and the person on the merchant to whom you  5 are making payment in which bank he has a bank account, they would be different
banks, but it is interoperable across bank s.
UPI has complete interoperability within the financial system in India,  which  is the best
use case that we have and many new p roducts also which we are launching from time
to time. When you travel to India you can use the ‘ UPI One World’.  You can create a
UPI wallet and pay in dollars or pounds or whatever currency you have and get that
wallet , spend  in India and then on your ret urn at the airport you exchange it  and take
back your foreign currency.
The ease of using UPI is its Interoperability . Another thing that UPI has is that we have
streamlined the QR codes. Earlier each merchant would have m ultiple QR codes. Now
there are j ust two QR codes, one is the UPI QR code which is hugely  popular and then
there is another QR code which is the BharatPe QR code that has also been there.
You will have only tw o QR codes, but mostly it is a single UPI code  which is used by
everybody and now that has been made interoperable with our Central Bank Digital
Currency , e-₹.
NDTV Profit :
When you took over the crisis was panning out and by the end of your tenure , you are
probably the longest -serving Governor of the RBI in several decades. What do you
see as your single biggest achievement ? It has been a crisis firefighting kind of tenure
at least initially and especially during COVID. What do you see as your biggest
achievement during the year that you have been at the hub?
Shaktikanta Das:
I joined just about a c ouple of m onths after the IL&FS crisis that happened around
August -September 2018 and I joined in December 2018. So,  the financial market was
already in a kind of m ajor turmoil, a crisis of confidence,  activities in the market
financial markets  had frozen;  then we had in 2020 the COVID crisis and then we have
the Ukraine war and its fall off and then all these make sense of recent multiple shocks.
It is not my achievement and I would like to put in that  it is RBI's achievement because
whatever we have done I would like to giv e the credit to the entire team RBI . I am not
saying just because I am speaking from such a platform I genuinely mean it. It  is the
achievement of the RBI and the major achievement i s to bring stability into the financial
sector, stability of the currency, st ability in the external sector,  and public confidence,
the investor confidence not only investor confidence in India but investor confiden ce
outside.  Bringing that stability to the  financial sector  has been the major achievement
of the Reserve Bank of India in the last five years.  It carries a lot of weight and in one
event in which I w as participating in K ochi last year , there were a lot of College
students present. So,  one college st udent, a girl stood up and asked m e Governor , 6 how does it feel you sign the Indian currency. So how does it feel? Does it give you a
sense of power? I told her , look, it is not a sens e of power i t is a sense of responsibility ,
because w hat does the Governor s ay that I promise to pay the bearer so much.  When
I say I promise to pay the bearer the responsibility of the Reserve Bank is to maintain price s tability . The value of the rupee does not go down because of high inflation. So,
there is a c ommitment behind that signature on behalf of this sovereign that we will
ensure price stability and stability with regard to inflation. So,  it is a huge responsibility .
NDTV Profit :
Thank you very much sir for taking out time for us.