1 Edited Transcript of the Governor’s interaction at the World
Economic Forum Annual Meetings 2024 at Davos January  18, 202 4
Stephan Mergenthaler :
Well, good morning and a warm welcome to this horizon scan session on growth
engines for emerging markets. Thank you for joining us here in the Ideas Hub at Davos
and thank you to our communities joining us online from around the world. My name is Stephan Mergenthaler  from the World Economic Forum and I have the pleasure to
facilitate this session.
In this Hub , we bring together over the course of this week experts, stakeholders, and
leaders engaged in the various different discussions here in Davos, trying to connect
the dots, paint a picture of where we are heading and identifying clear areas for
collective action and that  is really what our ambition is with this work we do at the
World Economic Forum on Strategic Intelligence trying to build an appreciat ion that
these issues cannot be addressed in isolation. We have to look at them in their
complex interconnection, whether we think about the financial and monetary systems ,
whether we think about the future of work or indeed considerations of social protec tion.
They have to be part of an integrated picture, an integrated policy response, and
integrated business strategies.
We, so,  undertake this mapping effort across hundreds of different issues with
universities, think tanks, and international organi sations around the world and provide
open access to the world to contribute to more informed discussions around these
critical global issues and at moments like this here in Davos we asked some of the key
experts that are with us to map out what they see as the most important issues on the
horizon and in this regard I  am honou red to introduce Shaktikanta Das , Governor of
the Reserve Bank of India,  to share his horizon scan, his outlook on the most important
issues . Governor ! Over to you. We look forward to the discussion.
Shaktikanta Das:
Good morning. Thank you for having me here. I  will speak briefly and thereafter we
can take a few questions or comments. The first point I would like to say is that the last four years, starting with the onset of COVID , have been a period of what I call a
period of great volatility. I think the volatility that we have seen in the last four years has been unprecedented.  Much has already been spoken and talked about. We
started with COVID, followed by the war in Ukraine.
The synchroni sed inflation problem is rearing its head almost in every country. The
synchroni sed tightening of monetary policy, the tightening of financial market
conditions and everything was happening together. Amidst all th is, there were new
flashpoints  on geopolitics in Geoeconomics also coming up that have  added further to
the volatility .  2 This time around,  although the problems were much larger , the world has also shown
a great amount of resilience.  When COVID started,  everybody talked of contraction
and contraction to continue for years. COVID was controlled. The contraction was
also, the economic growth was also sought to be revived. W hen the Ukraine war
started and when the policy tightening started,  there was the apprehension that many
countries w ould go into recession, particularly advanced economies . Whenever they
have tightened, they have ended up in a kind of recession. Emerging market economies also face the problem of spillovers adding to their domestic problem s and
volatilities.
But this time around, the world has proved itself to be much more resilient. The kind
of hard landing that was apprehended has not happened. Economies have broadly revived, but global growth has definitely slowed down and that is a cause of worry.
The world has proved to be resilient, but there are certain hard facts which have to be
kept in mind.
Number one, as I mentioned global growth has slowed down, geopolitical flashpoints
are continuing, new flashpoints are coming up, supply chain bottlenecks have not
really fully normali sed and inflation has also been brought under control, but individual
countries still have not reached their target and the last mile is proving to be very
difficult.
So far as India is concerned,  in this kind of environment , the economy has emerged
and has come out of the recent period of crisis much stronger. The GDP growth has
been in the last three years including the current year  over 7%. In the year of the
pandemic, we had a contraction of 5.8% , thereafter in 2021- 22, the economy recorded
a growth of 9.1%. The next year that is last year it was 7.2% . Current year the
expectation is that GDP growth in real terms will be 7.3% and that is the data given
out by the National Statistical O ffice.
Yester day, in another forum , I have mentioned that my sense is that in the next
financial year , i.e., April- March 2024- 25, India’s GDP growth will touch 7% and when
that happens for 4 consecutive years , India would have recorded a  growth of 7% or
above. Inflation has also moderated from its peak of 7.8% and now it is well within the
target band. B ut its journey towards 4% is continuing.
Our policy remains actively disinflationary,  and we hope that this pace will continue.
The main uncertainty in inflation has been food inflation because it is subject to supply -
side factors on which the Central Bank has little control. There are weather -related
events which also add some time to spike in vegetable prices , create bottlenecks with
regard to transportation and add to headline inflation. But the interesting thing is that
amidst all this core inflation,  which is non- oil, non-gold,  has moderated to 3.8%. Our
target inflation headline target is  4%, and core inflation at 3.8% gives us the confidence
that the Monetary Polic y has worked and is working through the system.  3 India has emerged stronger from this recent period of crisis. T he economy has shown
its resilience, growth has revived. We are recording 7% or above growth.  Inflation has
been brought under control. Financial stability has been maintained.  The banking
sector in particular has shown remarkable recovery from the overall health of the
banking system which prevailed let's say  about a decade ago.  All the performance
parameters of banks  whether it is with regard to c apital adequacy, or it is with regard
to the size of the non- performing or stressed assets or with regard to profitability the
banks are performing well.
In the Reserve Bank , we have done the st ress test  under very serious conditions and
various scenarios and our stress tests show that the Indian banking sector will be able
to, not only at the systemic level but also at the individual entity level , withstand severe
crisis situations and all banks  will be able to meet the minimum regulatory
requirements.
So, the economy has revived well, and inflation has been brought under control and is
moderating. Financial sector stability has been maintained. The external sector has also been quite stable. The current account deficit has come down. Our foreign
exchange buffers have also gone up and we hold about US$ 620 billion of f oreign
exchange reserves  which is sufficient  and gives a lot of confidence to international
investors who put their money into India, that India will be able to service it s external
payment obligations.
On the whole, all this has happened,  and the Indian economy has revived w ell. Now
how has this happened? This has happened because of v ery coordinated fiscal and
monetary policy actions. During the period of COVID, our policies were targeted and
calibrated, we acted proactively,  and our approach was multi -dimensional.
While we injected a lot of liquidity, the liquidity was targeted and was injected for
definite periods. It was not open- ended which becomes very difficult to pull it back. We
gave out liqui dity for definite periods of 1 year, 3 years, and 6 months like that. So, this
money automatically came back after 1  year or 3  years and the banks , to whom we
gave this  liquidity , knew that this had  to be returned after 1  year or 3  years. So, they
also planned their activities accordingly.
Our liquidity injections were also targeted;  targeted to small and medium enterprises ;
targeted to certain specified sectors like, for example, micro -enterprises ; it was
targeted to small non-bank  lenders. So, it was targeted and calibrated. The amount of
liquidity that we gave, we were able to pull it back. We also cut down our policy repo
rates and interest rates. But we have again after the inflation increased them.
When I say our approach was multidimensional it was not just o n the monetary side
because we are the regulator of almost  the entire financial sector, excepting the capital
markets and the insurance s ector. So, we also focused on s trengthening the health of
the financial institutions and bank s. It was during the COVID period that we impressed 4 upon banks that they have to build additional capital buffers . Liquidity conditions, the
world over  were v ery good and we kept on nudging them, prodding them to raise
capital, almost every bank raised additional capital and built  up additional buffers and
all of them exceeded the minimu m capital adequacy requirements.
Simultaneously, we were also able t o do a lot of  cleaning up of the bad assets w hich
were  thereby putting them into the resolution mechanism which was put up. W e also
tightened our supervision over banks and non- bank  lenders . We substantially
improved our regulatory architecture for the financial sec tor during this period . Another
area completely different area where we brought about great changes was the focus
on technology, on fintech,  on payment systems . UPI the unified payment interface w as
already picking up before COVID started, but the period of COVID helped us to give a
greater push to U PI. We launched s everal new products under UPI  so that people can
use this mode of payment even where i nternet facilities are not available. New
products have been launched. The number of transactions has gone up exponentially.
We issued regulatory guidelines for digital lenders because d igital lending was really
comi ng up by the f intech companies and while it was providing a lot of reach among
the people, we found that there were issues which needed to be addressed by the
regulator. So, we were perhaps one of the first countries to issue a digital lending
guideline .
Now, where do we go from here? Very briefly, our current focus is to preserve the
macroeconomic and financial stability that we have so carefully built up. Not just
preserve it, but also improve upon it to strengthen it further. Our emphasis will also continue to remain very agile with regard to our supervision and regulation of the
banks . Our greater and continuing emphasis will be on the entire fintech ecosystem.
We have given a lot of encouragement to the f intech companies which are coming up
into the financial services sector, and startup companies which are coming into the
financial sector . Digital lending will get a lot of support and very recently we have
announced the setting up of a self-regulatory  organi sation for the fintech companies.
We do understand that between the f intech companies, between innovators who are
operating in the financ ial serv ices sector, and the regulator t here has to be some
agency, a self -regulatory  body , which acts as a bridge between the entities  and the
regulator so that we are up to date on t he industry -related issues . A good part of our
regulation or compliance expectations , and a good part of business ethics and
business conduct all that can be designed and delivered by a  self-regulatory
organi sation under the overarching supervision of the regulator. I will conclude here
because I can see the time and so on the whole if I summari se, this time around the
world has recovered far better, but challenges continue, new geopolitical flashpoints
are coming up almost every day, s upply chains are yet to be normali sed.
India has recovered far better, in terms of macroeconomic stability, resilience, financial stability and growth potential. The inherent growth momentum of India is well
sustained and that gives us the confidence to say that the growth in India will be 5 sustainable. And finally, our focus on technology i n fintech is on bringing in entirely
new business processes and methods t hat emphasis will also continue. I  will stop
here. Thank you.
Stephan Mergenthaler :
Excellent. Thank you sir. I will just pass the microphone to Mr. Prasad.
Prasad:
Thank you Governor Das for that very  nice overview . You spoke about t he supply
shocks petering out and then you also alluded to the geopolitical risk. Do you think
there is a prospect of these geopolitical risks flaring up again in a way that they affect
supply chains and create  supply shocks that once again create an inflation problem
for us ? In other words, despite core inflation being under 4%, is it  premature to declare
victory?  But as we think about these geopolitical issues in the long term  there is a
notion that India is v ery well positioned right in the middle of t hese geopolitical
fractures. So, India could benefit from the repositio ning of trade and global flows, but
do you see any risks for India from these geopolitical shifts ? It sounds very good that
India can benefit  from these realignments but  are there risks as well to India?
Shaktikanta Das:
If there are geopolitical conflicts , and there are geopolitical conflicts , every country will
definitely be affected,  and India cannot be left completely insulated. New flashpoints
almost periodically you are hearing.  Some new development s in some part s of the
world , which cause a great amount of concern and going forward,  may create
problems with regard to the supply chain.
To that extent, every country will be i mpacted and India cannot be an exception.  Now
let's say food prices. W e are self -sufficient with regard to the major food items, cereals,
rice, wheat , etc., because our domes tic production is  very high.  But the challenge is
when global prices go up, our domestic prices also respond to that and India is an
exporter of rice and wheat. So, our local prices will also go up.
If there are international developments or for example a lot of sunflower oil comes fr om
the Caspian Sea region. If there are continuing conflicts, if there are bottlenecks and
impediments imposed on the movement of goods , then there will be a problem. It will
have an impact on international edible oi l prices . India has a population of 1.4 billion
and we have to look after them . So, what India has done like every other country, there
has been a lot of friends shoring, nearshoring, new supply chains, and new systems
being built up. So, there will be an impact on India, but overall,  India is better placed
in terms of dealing with this crisis and that is why we have been focusing on continuing with our financial sector reforms and also the structural reforms which the government
has undertaken in the last few years and that momentum also we do expect will be
sustained.  6 So, the inherent strength of the economy and the fundamentals of the economy today
are much stronger . Every country will have problems, but  amidst all this, India is far
better placed to deal with the global challenges.
Stephan Mergenthaler :
Thank you S ir. There is another question over here.
Participant  1:
Governor , thank you very much for the presentation. Your comment regarding self -
regulation on fintech is very interesti ng. So, I was wondering if that is a model you
created or something that you model led from somewhere else and adapted b ecause
there is a lot of conversation. So, for fintech, given that it  is upcoming in the emerging
markets I would be interested to know a little bit more.
Shaktikanta Das:
Thank you. There are two aspects to it. One is the digital lenders  which  are various
non-banking lenders, what you call NBFI s. We, in India,  call them NBFCs, non- banking
financial companies . They are lenders, but they are not banks. Most of them cannot
collect deposits . They raise their money by floating bonds or by investors who put their
money. Now these people started lending through digital processes, and we saw that
this was a kind of new thing which was developed. It had advantages, but it also had
inbuilt  deficiencies in terms of customer protection, in terms of business ethics and in
terms of regulatory compliance. So, we formed a committee headed by one of our
senior officers with experts from outside and they had wide- ranging consultations with
the industry, and with the public . They came out with a discussion paper which was
put in the public domain. We got hundreds of comments. We examined them and we
issued what we call digital le nding guidelines . That is the first aspect.
The second thing is with regard to pure technology companies , which a re not lending
themselves, but which are offering f intech solutions, and technology solutions to the
companies . Many of these lenders have partnerships with them. Banks also have
partnerships with them because these are the guys who are providing technology
models like, for example, there are now a lot of algorithms, now a lot of model -based
lending also which is happening to identify customers to originate loans t o disburse
loans . So, we have to re gulate these f intech companies because they are not directly
regulated by us, but our regulated entities like banks and non- banking lenders are
utilising them. W e have issued guidelines for the banks and the non -bank  lenders and
made them respons ible with regard to their  conduct, with regard to ethics, and with
regard to the overall guidelines that  their third-party  service providers are required to
provide.
So, it was a lot to answer your question directly. It was internal work  but with a lot of
external consultation.  7 Participant  2:
Thank you Governor for the insightful talk earlier. Quickly, if you could briefly talk about
the path that you see from here on for the digital rupee and what kind of timelines you
see with regard to that ; vis-a-vis and also briefly in regard to what other countries are
doing and how does that compared to what India is doing in this regard?
Shaktikanta Das:
The digital rupee is the Central Bank Digital Currency  (CBDC) . We have launched a
pilot project both in the wholesale mode as well as in the retail mode. We launched the CBDC ‘ e-Rupee ’, as we call it , in November, Decem ber 2022. It  is a pilot project.
Countrywide launching will depend on the succ ess, learnings and fine- tuning of the
CBDC itself. That is the distance which we have to cover . But we have no target date
that we will implement by such and such date. We are also in no undue hurry or rush
to implement it full scale because after all , it is a currency, and its safety,  integrity and
efficiency have  to be ensured.
So, under this pilot , which is basically a learning process , we have about 4 million
users under retail mode who have been on board and there are 0. 4 million merchants ,
who have also been onboarded. The QR code which is used for the e- Rupee which  is
our digital currency i s the same QR code which is used in UPI.  In other words, the
CBDC, the e -Rupee and the UPI payment systems have been made interoperable and
so in the retail mode a lot  of transactions are happening.
In the wholesale mode, the transactions with regard to the G overnment securities
market, primary auctions as well as the G overnment ’s secondar y market operations
plus overnight money market trans actions are in the wholesale mode. Now , there are
a lot of learnings  and challenges coming up and our experts within the RBI are dealing
with this process , because we want to make it truly robust.
The advantage of CBDC vis -a-vis the UPI  is that i t is not one versus the other. Many
people ask this question everywhere. U PI is a payment system, t he C BDC is a
currency. CBDC can operate in completely  dark zones , i.e., where there is no Internet
is available. Offline payments will become much easier because,  from my CBDC wallet
I can pay money to your wallet.
In UPI we are  now trying to facilitate that . But the  CBDC payments will be very efficient
and the greatest advantage of CBDC  will be cross -border payments internationally.
International cross -border payments will become far more ef ficient, faster and c ost-
effective as and when other countries adopt this digital currency . International payment
systems will really gain in efficiency, speed,  and cost, and ultimately it  is a new
technology which is developing,  and it is going to be the future of money.
Participant 3:
Excellent Governor. I am from United Biscuits , London. We are a global baker,  and
we have a factory at  Kala Amb in India. My question is I  am a believer of diversity and 8 it is well observed, it  is a major risk depending on one single country as a major hub
that was China in the past. I do see a big chance for India as well in that respect to
become one of the global hubs in terms o f supply. Supply of many things i ngredients,
comm odities and technical stuff . Are you planning to invest further into logistics
infrastructure , etc., in India and how are you going to fund this?
Shaktikanta Das:
The f irst thing I want to say is that  it is not a game of competition between India versus
somebody else. Where there are opportunities every country tries to capitali se an d
naturally India is also capitali sing on it. India is now , in many areas , emerging as a
major part of the global supply chain, particularly with regard to information technology
(IT). It is no longer  the traditional IT services which the companies were outsourcing
from India.
Today a lot of business processes, product developments, accounting services, legal
services, this global capability centers, all those activities are now happening in India and India is becoming a hub for that.
Coming specifically  to your question with regard to the supply of  inputs and other
materials for manufacturing the domestic logistics facilities in terms of the development
of ports, airports to handle cargo, t he road network, and the railways network , there is
a huge amount  of investment which is taking place.  That has happened because,  in
the last four years or five years, the G overnment has given a big thrust on capital
expenditure.
It is not only the Central Government  in Delhi, but also many S tate governments are
invest ing heavily in capital expenditure, mostly going into physical infrastructure,
roads, railways,  airport s, and ports, but also digital infrastructure. So, that is continuing
and there is a lot of private investment also entering into the space of logistics with
regard to cold chain stor age facilities and other things.
With regard to funding, yes, that  is a very good question. On the infrastructure side,
the entire spending at the moment is primarily by the G overnment and the government
agencies. There are several government agencies like the Indian Railway Finance
Corporation, and the National Highways Authority , the majority owned by the
government , and t hey access a lot of funding from the market through the bonds r oute,
not only from the domestic market but also the international  market.
So, a lot of investment is happening in that way . But the G overnment is very mindful
of remaining on the path of fiscal consolidation. We also interact regularly with the
Government. We also impress upon the Government the need to remain fiscally
prudent . The Government have been f iscally very prudent for the last several years
and they will continue to be so.
Stephan Mergenthaler :
Excellent. We are out of time.  Governor , thank you very much for your thoughts.