1
South Asia ’s Current Macroeconomic Challenges
and Policy Priorities
Keynote Address by Shri Shaktikanta Das, Governor, Reserve
Bank of India – January 06, 202 3 - at the high -level Conference
co-organised by  International Monetary Fund (IMF) Asia and
Pacific Department (APD) and IMF South Asia Regional Training
and Technical Assistance Centre (SARTTAC) , New Delhi
I am delighted to have been invited by the IMF to join this
distinguished gathering here today  to discuss pathways to resilient,
sustainable  and inclusive  growth in South Asia. I am happy to note that
the conference proceedings will be anchored by the research findings
and policy recommendations of the book titled “South Asia’s Path to
Resilient Growth”. In the current international setting,  global trade and
growth outlook appear uninspiring,  and policies have to be conducted
amid  a whirlwind of uncertainty . At such critical times, conferences  of
this nature can help us better understand the evolving scenarios and
policy trade- offs. In my address today, I shall briefly cover some of my
thoughts on South Asia’s Current Macroeconomic Challenges and
Policy Priorities .
2.  Looking back into history, t he South Asian region  has been a  key
hub of  ideas, commerce, art and culture, etc . The Indus Valley
civilisation was among the three earliest civilisations on earth and was
the most extensive. In the so called middle ages, trade and commerce
flourished in a variety of commodities such as spices, precious metals
and other minerals, handicrafts and food items. O verall, the South
Asian region has had an outsized influence on the progress of
civilisation  and trade in the world. Currently, t he region accounts for 2
about 25 per cent of  world population. W ith a median age of 27 years,
it is one of the youngest regions in the world. The average growth rate
of the region has  accelerated from 3 per cent in the 1970s to about 7
per cent in the latest decade (pre-pandemic) . Consequently, per -capita
income levels have risen alongside notable progress on key
development parameters . As per the IMF estimates , South Asia
contributes nearly 15 per cent to global growth, led by India and
Bangladesh. The region also receives one -fifth of total remittance flows
in the world.
3.  The South Asian region has grown , respond ing to formidable
global challenges in the past.  Following the food crisis of the 1960s , the
region successful ly implement ed the Green Revolution. After  the oil
shocks of the 1970s, emigration from South Asia to West Asia became
one of the largest market -driven labour flows . This, in turn,  led to a
significant increase in remittance flows to the  region . The Asian
financial crisis  of 1997 impacted the South Asian countries in terms of
surges in capital outflows and exchange market pressures. Over the
years, as a crisis prevention strategy, the  South Asian countries
prioritised sound macroeconomic policies and embraced f inancial
sector reforms focusing on competition , prudential regulation,
enhanced transparency , audit and accounting standards . These
measures  helped in preserving macro stability while sustaining
integration of domestic economies with the global economy .
4.  In recent years, multiple shocks, in particular the COVID -19
pandemic and the war in Ukraine , have dampened the economic
prospects of the South Asian region, as in other parts of the world. 3
Some countries in the region have also been contending with the
ramifications of unsustainable debt and climate change induced events.
Consequently, they have been seeking recourse to the IMF’s financing
facilities. Notwithstanding these challenges, as per the World Economic
Outlook database (October 2022) of the IMF , India, Bangladesh and
Maldives would be among the fastest growing economies in the world in 2022  and 2023 . According to the Asian Development Bank’s
December 2022 outlook, the South Asian region’s  GDP is projected to
grow at 6.5 per cent in 2022 and 6.3 per cent in 2023.
5.  The World Bank estimates that regional co- operation could be a
win-win situation for all countries of the region
1. For example, intra -
regional trade is currently only one- fifth of its potential, implying an
annual shortfall of US$44 billion. The World Bank assessment also
suggests that a  common electricity market for Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India and Nepal can yield  savi ngs of US$17 billion in capital costs.
Investment in transport and logistics could help reduce the cost for container shipments in South Asia.  According to a study by the IMF
(2019) on South Asia, more than 150 million people will enter the South Asian labour force by 2030. The dependency ratio is expected to
continue ebbing for almost two decades , indicating the strong
demographic dividend the region is set to reap .
Policy Priorities
I would now like to focus on some of the desirable policy priorities for
the South Asian region . I have identified six such policy priorities.
1 Source:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/south- asia-regional -integration/overview
4
Taming Inflation
6. Multiple external shocks in the form of COVID related global
supply chain disruptions, food and energy crisis  following the war in
Ukraine, and financial market volatility arising from the aggressive
monetary policy tightening have exerted sustained price pressures in
the South Asian economies, as in other parts of the world.  During the
first three quarters of 2022, food price inflation in South Asia averaged
more than 20 per cent. The region’s heavy  dependence on imported
fossil fuels has made it vulnerable to imported fuel inflation. For
successful disinflation, credible monetary policy actions accompanied
by targeted supply  side interventions, fiscal, trade policy and
administrative measures  have become the key instruments . While the
recent softening of commodity prices and supply chain bottlenecks
should help in lower ing inflation go ing ah ead, risks to growth and
investment outlook may rise if inflation persists at high level. Prioritising
price stability, may therefore be the optimal policy choice in the current
context for the region.  The approach to disinflation, however, needs to
be mindful of the rising risks to the growth outlook in an environment of
deteriorating prospects for global growth and trade activity.
Contain ing External Debt Vulnerabilities
7. The surge in external debt in recent years and associated
vulnerabilities have undermined macroeconomic stability in several
countries  of the South Asian region. External debt, which was already
elevated in low - and middle- income countries (that include all South
Asian economies) in the pre -pandemic period, surged to US$  9.3 trillion
in 2021 from US$ 8.2 tri llion in 2019, an increase of US$ 1.1 trillion.
5
8. The Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) was set up by the
G20 in May 2020. U p to December 2021, an estimated US$ 12.9 billion
of debt service was deferred. According to the World Bank, 60 per cent
of the 73 DSSI -eligible countries are at high risk of debt distress or are
already experiencing it. It is estimated that total external debt service payments on public and publicly guaranteed debt by poorest countries may rise by 35 per cent to over US$ 62 bi llion in 2022 and to remain
high up to 2024 due to rising global interest rates and the compounding of interest on DSSI debt service deferrals.
9. Even though the participation of private creditors was encouraged
in the DSSI, their response has not  been encouraging. There has been
a notable shift in the creditor composition of low - and middle- income
countries between 2010 and 2021. The share of lending by private creditors in long- term public and publicly guaranteed debt was 61 per
cent in 2021 (46 per ce nt in 2010) and the share of debt owed to
bondholders was 47 per cent  in 2021  (29 per cent in 2010).
10. A distinct shift in the creditor base over time in favour of private
lenders and non-Paris Club official creditors has added a new
dimension to debt restructuring processes for the low -income
International  Development Assistance (IDA)- eligible debtor countries.
The share of debt owed to non- Paris Club creditors rose to 68 per cent
in 2021  from 42 per cent in 2010. The increasing reliance on private
creditors has raised debt servicing costs and complicated creditor
coordination in debt resolution efforts. During 2010 -2021, t he average
maturity on loans from private creditors was 12 years as compared with 26 years for loans from official creditors, and the average interest rate 6
on loans from private creditors was 5 per cent vis- à-vis 2 per cent on
loans from official creditors.
11. The role of multilateral organisations, particularly the IMF and the
World Bank,  becomes crucial in making debt treatment effort s more
effective, while also  strengthening the mechanism of recording,
reporting and analysis of debt data so as to enhance transparency  and
preserve debt sustainability. The IMF’s role in  capacity building in the
region, with a focus on region specific macro dynamics, policy
effectiveness challenges, and economic aspirations of the nations
would also be helpful.
Raising Productivity
12. While sustained and broad- based economic recovery remains the
current policy focus, it is necessary to undertake deep structural
reforms to raise the potential growth trajectories of the economies in
the South Asian region. Ongoing global realignment of supply chains ,
green transition and advances in technology offer new opportunities for investment and growth, but policies would need to create the congenial
climate for attracting new private investment, with public sector taking
the lead in areas that can create large positive externalities, such as
infrastructure, education, and health .
13. In this context, let me highlight some specific areas of policy
priority. First, undertaking desirable structural change would require an
improvement in resource  allocati on – moving production from low
productive sectors to high productive sectors and promotion  of
innovation.  Second, skill mismatches – a major constraint to resource 7
reallocation –would warrant policy focus on education and skill
upgradation. This is particularly important to the South Asian region, as
the favourable demography of the region would require that production
processes must be labour -intensive while being  globally  competitive.
Third, while f ree trade and FDI have been conventionally congenial for
diffusion of technology  and augmentation of productivity,  the region’s
investment on R&D must also increase from the current low levels, and
the policy environment for scientific research and start -ups must be
made more rewarding.  Fourth, i nvestment in physical infrastructure  –
energy, transportation, telecommunication – which are prime drivers of
productivity growth have to be enhanced.
14. Infrastructure in the contemporary world of digital revolution would
also include digital infrastructure – data centres, cellular towers  and
fibre connectivity , with an emphasis on s calability and resilience.
Fintech, E -commerce, Ed Tech, Health Tech  and Food Tech are the
new age growth propellers and need quality internet connectivity and
reliable digital payments.
Strengthen ing Cooperation for Energy Security
15. The South Asian region  has a high reliance on fossil fuels and
imported energy, making the region vulnerable to volatile oil, gas and coal prices. In view of the dominating influence of geopolitical factors in
driving global energy market dynamics, the region needs to strengthen
energy cooperation arrangements so as to enhance resilience to
external shocks.
8
16. India and Bangladesh have already agreed to enhance the sub -
regional connectivity in the energy sector by linking the power grids of
the two countries synchronously. The India -Bangladesh Friendship
Pipeline Project (IBFPP) – a 130 km pipeline joining Siliguri in West
Bengal and Parbatipur in Bangladesh –  would have a capacity to export
petroleum products of one million metric tonnes  per annum.  Other
examples of cooperation include transportation of petroleum, oil and lubricants across national jurisdictions . Similarly, cross -border
petroleum products pipeline and joint venture hydroelectric project s are
testimony to the immense scope for energy cooperation in the region.
17. Harmonisation of testing processes, performance and
conservation standards, and labelling criteria for electrical appliances in the region can contribute to regional energy security by promoting cost savings and by boosting efficiency and trade. Integration of
national power systems in the region could facilitate leveraging of untapped surplus hydropower while giving a fillip to development of
solar and wind resources. Programmes of bulk procurement and distribution of energy -efficient appliances can be adopted by countries
in the region. India, for example, has  the UJALA (Unnat Jyoti by
Affordable LEDs for All) scheme for distribution of LED bulbs at an affordable price.
Cooperat ion for a Greener Economy in the Reg ion
18. South Asia is one of the most vulnerable regions to climate
change because of its large population and degradation of natural
resources. Extreme climate events –  floods, droughts, heat waves and
unseasonal rains – have increased over the past century. As per the 9
estimates of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), between 2018
and 2030, the funding requirements for investment in renewable energy, greening the vehicle fleet and making future building stock
green and resilient to climate change risks in South Asia alone would
be over US$410 billion, US$670 billion and US$1.5 trillion, respectively.
Besides financing, access to technology and key minerals would also
be critical for successful green transition.  Robust regional disaster
management systems could help in ensuring timely and effective response to devastating climate events. India spearheaded the global
initiative and launched a Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
(CDRI)  in 2019. Another initiative, the International Solar Alliance (ISA)
in partnership with the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP) aims at solari sing the world. The South Asian region must
strengthen cooperation to make green transition of the region faster and
at reasonable cost.
Promot ing Tourism
19. Tourism is one of the major contributors to the GDP of some of
the South Asian nations  such as Maldives, Nepal, Bhutan and Sri
Lanka. As a sector, tourism is a huge creator of employment. T he entire
region has rich untapped potential  in tourism.  In the recent period,  the
tourism sector has somewhat revived in the region, but is yet to reach
pre-COVID levels. I ntra-regional tourist flows also remain below
potential.  Regional initiatives such as religious tourism circuits
spanning countries that have common historical and cultural footprint,
adventure tourism circuits and medical/spiritual/Ayurveda circuits can help boost the tourism  industry and create a vibrant regional value
chain.  10
Conclusion
20. With the global trade outlook for 2023 overcast, greater intra -
regional trade in South Asia can enhance opportunities for growth and
employment in the region. At the central bank level, a key dimension of
cooperation in the region has been learning from ea ch other on
common goals and challenges, such as infrastructure financing, digital
financial inclusion, reducing the cost of cross-border remittances  (by
linking with UPI system) and  unconventional  monetary policy, to name
a few.  Rupee settlement of cross  border tra de and Central Bank Digital
Currency (CBDC) where the RBI has already started moving forward,
can also be areas of greater cooperation in the future.
21. The book to be released today provides plenty of new ideas for
forging cooperation in the region and seeking solutions to common
problems through right policy interventions. I appreciate the effort s of
the authors whose contributions made this book possible. I do believe
that the discussions during the day on policy choices will help us in
reshaping the future prospects of the South Asian region.
Thank you.