1 Governor’s Inter view  with ET Now  on March  6, 2024 (Edited  Excerpts)
ET Now :
From  fragile five to top five, the Indian economy  is now enjoying a pedestal  positioning.
Growth  is headed in the right direction,  inflation is coming  under  check, the NPA cycle
is weak,  and fresh  capital  formation  has started.  The Reserve B ank of India G overnor
and his team  have made  the impossible look easy.  The Indian financial system is now
resilient  despite all the shocks. But, are the problems  of yesterday  behind us or will
they haunt  us? What  about  global  external  shocks and the preparedness  of the Indian
financial  system? To get all these answers,  I have with me the man of the moment,
Mr. Shaktikanta Das, Governor  of the Reserve B ank of India.
Governor,  it is an honour and the channel's  pleasure to have you on ET Now. Thank
you Governor.  I guess  the introduction was the question in itself.  Ever since you took
over as the Governor  of the Reserve B ank of India,  in December  2018,  is this the best
macro  in the economy  setup we have seen?
Shaktikanta Das:
In a long time, not just in the last five years . Of course,  in the last five years,  we have
seen several  turbulent  moments,  initially  coming from the collapse of the ILFS,
followed by COVID and so many  other  external  developments.  So, we have gone
through a very turbulent  period.  But for quite a while,  if you see over a period of time,
over a period of years,  the confluence of factors  that we have today,  it is perhaps  one
of the best.  Look  at the GDP,  you look at the fiscal consolidation,  which  of course is
on the fiscal side.  You look at the current  account  deficit,  you look at inflation,  and you
look at the fact that inflation has been brought  under  some kind of control  without
sacrificing  or without  paying the kind of heavy  price  which  perhaps  some of the
economies  have paid to bring back  inflation  under  control.  So, if you look overall  in
terms  of growth,  in terms  of inflation,  in terms  of other  macro  parameters,  like the
current  account  deficit  or economic  activities,  in all respects, and in terms  of the overall
stability  of the financial  sector,  the overall  stability  in the banking sector, the NBFC
sector,  it is perhaps  one of the best confluence of factors.
Having  said that, this is a philosophy  which  we follow internally  that there  is no room
for complacency  at all because a problem  can suddenly  arise  from any corner  of the
world  which  may really  complicate the challenges  for us. So absolutely  no room  for
complacency  and we need to remain focused and committed  to our goal of maintaining
financial  stability  and supporting economic  activity  in the country.
ET Now :
But, looking  at the current  set of data points , the macro  circumstances, and the
permutation in the combination,  can I say that you do not see a problem  which  is on
the horizon ? If there is an external  shock, something unknown that we are not privy  to
right now,  that could be an episodic  issue?  2 Shaktikanta Das:
More or less, you are right in accepting that in a geopolitical  crisis, new flashpoints  can
originate anytime . There are weather -related challenges  which  can happen and which
do happen without  much- advanced notice.  Excepting that at a structural  level,  I do not
see any major  problem s. But as I made a reference in the last MPC statement  of mine
about  the global  debt, it is not so much a problem  in India because our debt to GDP is
at a certain level and it is expected to moderate,  which  I have talked  about  in the last
MPC statement.  When I say our debt to GDP,  the country's  debt vis-a-vis external
lenders  and the debt of the State  Governments  and the Central  Government  put
together.  These are all within  manageable limits.  They  are set to moderate in the
coming years. But if you look at global  public  debt in some of the advanced economies,
with their large fiscal deficits  and with their large percentage of borrowing,  i.e., with
their large percentage  of debt to GDP ratios,  if this continues , it can sort of pose  bigger
challenges,  particularly  to the emerging market  economies  (EMEs) . But that is not
something which  will affect  India immediately.  Also, among all EMEs,  India is much
better  prepared to deal with such challenges.
ET Now :
Governor,  the Reserve B ank of India was ahead of the curve when they released their
GDP projections  for FY 2023- 24. The RBI number  was 7%, while  the consensus
number  was 6.3-6.5%.  Will the RBI remain ahead of the curve and upgrade their FY
2024- 25 GDP estimates  also? Is there a case  for it?
Shaktikanta Das:
The next Monetary  Policy  is just about  a month away  and our research teams  are
working  on inflation  and GDP numbers.  I do not want  to preempt  what  conclusions
they will come up with. But as I look at the growth outlook , we said last year,  sometime
towards  the end of October,  in one event  that the GDP  would  be in the order  of 7%.
You are absolutely  right. The market  was at 6.3% -6.5% and slowly  the market  adjusted
to that. But today,  the number  for the current  year given out is 7.6%.  Now,  once the
NSO  gives  a particular  data,  we work  on that number  because that is the final authority
which  gives  the GDP number.
Let me split it this way. First, let me talk about  the current  year,  then about  the next
year.  So far as the current  year is concerned,  the momentum  of economic  activity  has
been robust,  and we are now in the first week  of March.  Given  the kind of momentum
of economic  activity, the growth momentum  which  we are witnessing,  and the kind of
high- frequency  indicators,  the data points  which  we keep getting on a continuous
basis,  I would  not hesitate to say that there is every  possibility  of the 7.6%  growth for
the current  year being exceeded.  Now, we have the numbers  for the first three
quarters,  and the implicit  growth for the fourth quarter  is 5.9%.  Our sense and
understanding of the high- frequency  indicators  and the momentum  of economic
activity  tells us that this 5.9%  growth in Q4 could be exceeded.  When that happens,  3 obviously  the growth will be more  than 7.6%.  There is quite a good chance of the GDP
growth number  for the current  year being very close to 8%.
Now,  coming to next year,  we have  given a gross  projection of 7%. Other forecasters,
including  international  agencies,  have given much lower  projections  for next year.  For
next year, we are sticking to 7%. But I will wait for the next MPC,  and our research
teams  to do their analysis.  But at the moment, as I speak  to you, I would  stick to 7%
which  we have projected for next year.
ET Now :
Sir, if high- frequency  data points  are so strong,  then internal  data purely  is pointing
towards  a strong economic  expansion.  Can I at least  infer that?
Shaktikanta Das:
There is definitely  a strong economic  expansion. Y ou take 2021,  which  was the COVID
year when we had negative growth.  Thereafter,  the revised number  which  NSO  has
given out is 9.7%  for FY2021- 22. T he next year (FY 2022- 23), which  was earlier  7.2%,
has been revised slightly  downwards  to 7% and this year (FY 2023- 24), NSO  is giving
a 7.6%  target.  So 9.7%,  7% and 7.6% . If you take the average,  it is 8% and the 7.6%
can be closer to 8%. So, the momentum  is continuing to be very strong and we are
quite optimistic  about  next year.  I say it with a reasonable  amount  of confidence based
on our internal  analysis and research that 7% next year is very much  on the table.
ET Now :
When the Reserve Bank  of India makes  a comment , he knows  the data and he has
gone through the data and he is sure.  Otherwise , he will never  indicate that in a public
forum.
Governor,  when we spoke last time, the elephant  in the room,  in a sense,  was inflation.
Now inflation has come  down.  A lot of measures  have been taken by the RBI.
Commodity  prices  have also been benign.  Now that inflation  is moving towards  your
guided band,  which  is below  5%, more  towards  4%, is it time for the Reserve Bank  of
India to change its stance?
Shaktikanta Das:
Since  you use the analogy  of the elephant,  I would  like to tell you and your viewers
that as it looks  like the elephant  has gone for a walk,  the elephant  can come  back
anytime.  Why I am saying the elephant  can come back  anytime because there  are a
couple of major  uncertainties.  One is geopolitical , how the geopolitical  situation
evolves,  what  kind of supply  chain challenges  it will pose; and the second thing is
weather -related events  which  immediately  impact  our food prices.  So, these  are the
two major  uncertainties  and in the latest  inflation  print which  we have  for January  2024
that was released in February  2024, the inflation  was 5.1%.  We are still 110 basis
points  away  from our target  of 4%. We are completely  focused.  We are analy sing all
the incoming  data to see the inflation  outlook.  4 Having  said that, let me say that the direction of inflation  is not just the monthly
numbers , it is also the direction  in which  the inflation  numbers  are evolving.
Immediately  after the Ukraine  war, the inflation  was 7.8% , which  was in April 2022.
From  7.8% , it has come down to 5.1%.  In between,  it touched 4%, it touched below
5%, but it is now at 5.1%.  So we are now focused on taking inflation to the target  of
4%. Given the uncertainties  that we have,  we would  like inflation  to be durabl e and
around 4%. It cannot  be just one one-off number  or just one month number  touching
4%, which  will give us satisfaction.  It has to be sustainabl e and durabl e at around 4%.
That is something which  will give us greater  confidence.  But the direction  is very clear.
Inflation is on a downward trajectory.
ET Now :
If I have to use the cricket terminology  with you, you always  refer to cricket. Post-war
the RBI had no option but to adopt  a T- 20 format.  They  had to go for speed, power
and impact.  Are we back  to the classic test match  style now where  it is about  form and
not speed? It is about  style durability  and sustainability .
Shaktikanta Das:
We play ball by ball. Using a cricket analogy,  we play ball by ball. If you see the pattern
of T-20 around the 10th to 13/14th over,  usually  there is a kind of slight  moderation in
the pace.  But on a more  serious  note,  yes at that time,  front-ended action was required,
and we took front-ended action,  including an off-cycle meeting of MPC that was held
in May 2022,  where we announced a repo rate increase of 40 basis  points.  The market
was taken by surprise,  but I was surprised because if you read the April 2022 MPC
statement,  we had given clear  indications  that we would be moving very fast. But that
is all history.  So that was a time when front-ended action had to be taken.  Now, it is a
pause for several  meetings,  both in terms  of stance and in terms  of the rate front.  So,
we are watching the numbers,  and incoming data points  with regard to prices.  We
make our evaluation of the evolving outlook  and based on that, the future  action will
be decided.
ET Now :
Governor,  what  is the RBI's  view on the state  of the economy? All kinds of alphabets
have been  attributed  to describe the post-COVID recovery.  Is the post-COVID
recovery  really  unreal? Is there  stress on the rural economy  and do you see that
changing?
Shaktikanta Das:
Overall  the economy  is doing very well. During  the last three  years  including the current
year,  the average growth is 8%. Now you cannot  reach 8% growth just like that. Even
for the number  which  has now been given  out, 7.6%  for the current  year,  various
theories  are being given around.  I am not dismissing  the analysis  which  is being
explained.  For example,  there is a belief  that because subsidy  expenditure has come
down,  so GVA plus tax, gross  tax collections  minus  subsidy,  because subsidies  are
less. So, the GDP number  is looking high.  Various  explanations  are given,  but I would  5 again l ike to go back  to what  I mentioned about  the momentum.  The momentum  of
economic  activity  continues  to be strong.  You mentioned about  the rural sector.  Now
the demand for two-wheelers,  which  is an indicator  of rural demand, is again back.  It
has been recording high growth for the last couple of months.  Tractor  demand is
slower , but it is little slower.  It is not negative.  The growth is a little less compared to
previous  months.  But on the back  of double -digit growth for several  months , a slight
moderation  should not be seen as an indication of slowing  rural demand.  So, two-
wheeler  demand continues  to be strong,  tractor  demand is quite  stable and then the
demand for MNREGA also has come down.  Whatever  gap was there in the net sown
area in the Rabi crop has also been  filled up and the Rabi crop is expected to be good.
Wheat  crop is expected to exceed  last year's . But then we have challenges  with regard
to a few other  crops  like pulses,  etc. So, overall  rural demand is showing  signs  of
revival  or perhaps,  let me put it this way, that the rural demand has definitely  improved
compared to what  it was one year ago.
So far as urban demand is concerned,  urban demand continues  to be very strong.
Investment  activity  continues  to be strong driven by the G overnment  capex  and private
capex  is also beginning to pick up, particularly  in certain key sectors  like steel  and
those sectors  related to construction activity, textiles,  and chemicals. So private
investment  is also picking  up. Capacity  utilisation is also very high and this is not just
reflected in the RBI's  survey  but also in the various  industry  associations  and chambers
of commerce. T hey do a survey  among their members.  Yesterday , we had a detailed
interaction with various  industry  and trade bodies  and the apex  associations  at the All
India Associations. T heir internal  survey  among their members  also show s that the
capacity  utilisation  is very high and there is an expectation that private investment  will
also pick up. Demand for bank  credit  has also picked up. So, if you put all these things
together  the economy  is doing very well and compare ourselves  to other  countries.
You have to see it in a comparative sense. If today  we are recording let us say around
7.6% or between 7.6% and 8% growth,  please see where the other  countries  are. If
other  countries  were  doing 9% and 10% growth  and we are still at 8% or a little below
8%, it is not good.  But look at the other  countries.  So, the economy  is doing very well
and we are quite optimistic  about  the outlook,  the growth outlook  for India.
ET Now :
I would  like to draw  your attention to liquidity . Given the growth parameters  and the
inflation  and the growth dynamics , is the system now ready  for liquidity  injection?
Because liquidity  on a net basis  in the last 24 months  is actually  less. Is the system
now ready  to accept  that back  in?
Shaktikanta Das:
Liquidity  was in surplus  till about  September  last year or so. Thereafter  it has turned
into a deficit  and there  are various  factors  external  to the Reserve Bank . By external,
I do not mean  foreign,  but external  to the RBI. For example,  the currency  in circulation,
which  plays  an important  role in impacting the quantum  of liquidity,  Government  6 expenditure and the inflow of foreign exchange. T hese are the factors  which  are
external  to the RBI. As pointed  out in the last Monetary  Policy  Statement,  we have
been quite  nimble  in our liquidity  actions.  During  the last fortnight  or one month,  we
are almost  simultaneously  injecting liquidity  by way of variable- rate repo operations
and also periodically  taking out liquidity  by way of variable -rate reverse repo auctions.
In fact, over the last few weeks,  we have been doing more  than one auction on the
same day. That is the kind of nimbleness  which  we have demonstrated to manage
liquidity.  But for the last four weeks  or so, liquidity  has been in surplus  and that is
reflected in the fact that the overnight  call rates  which  were  earlier  hovering  around
6.75%  to even sometimes  touching 6.8%,  came down to about  6.6%  - 6.7%.
Yesterday,  it was below  6.5%.  So, liquidity  has been adequate.  There is a good
amount  of liquidity  in the system  and it is clearly  reflected in the overnight  call rates.
ET Now :
Paytm , I would like to establish for our viewers  what  a channel  view has been  that the
Reserve Bank  of India has acted in the public  interest  to safeguard the public  interest .
when it comes  to Paytm , the framework  was compromised and the Reserve Bank  of
India had no choice but to impose restrictions. Governor,  that is one month old. After
that, has Paytm  taken corrective a ction? Have  they earned the out-of-jail card? Could
there be a review of that decision?
Shaktikanta Das:
I do not want  to comment  on a specific  entity. It will not be proper  now for me to
comment  on a specific  entity  because there is correspondence going on between the
RBI and the regulated  entity.  In this case,  it is Paytm  that you have mentioned.  So
specifics of where it stands , I would  not like to mention.  But since you mentioned
Paytm, can I sort of slightly  expand the scope of my reply  and bring in a few things
which perhaps  would be of interest  to your viewers?
The f irst point  I want  to say is that the Reserve Bank's  action is against  a regulated
entity.  In this case,  the regulated entity  is a payment  bank.  The Reserve Bank's  action
is not against  any fintech  company.  I fail to understand and do not see any reason why
a narrative is building  up or was built up, as if the Reserve B ank has taken some
measures  against  fintech companies.  We have not taken any action against  any
fintech companies.  Fintech companies  are not regulated by the Reserve Bank  unless
they are NBFC  lenders.  If they are NBFC lenders,  yes, they are regulated by us. In
this case,  the action is against  a payment  bank.  Now,  you may say that I am being
defensive and all that. It is not being defensive at all. I see this kind of narrative in
certain sections  of the media. T he financial  sector  players  understand the situation
very well, but for the understanding of the wider  cross- section of your viewers , we have
done nothing so far as fintechs  are concerned. F intechs  are free to grow.  We are
supporting fintech companies.  We have set up an innovation hub. We have  formed
FinTech Department.  We have a regulatory  sandbox.  We are going towards  forming
what  you call SRO,  a self-regulatory  organi sation for fintechs.  So the RBI is and 7 remains  fully supportive of fintechs.  I am saying this only to instil a sense of clarity  in
the minds  of the people and the fintech players  that the RBI is all for fintech to grow.
So far as the RBI's  regulated entities  are concerned,  fintechs  provide a third-party
service. So as a third-party  service provider,  as far as we are concerned,  we fix the
responsibility  on the bank  or the NBFC,  which  is utilising the services of fintech  to
follow the rules  of the game. T hat is one point  which  I wanted to clarify.
The second point  is that the financial  sector ; when you come  to a regulated
environment,  there are regulations,  there are rules  of the game,  and you have to follow
the rules  of the game.  If you want  to drive  a new,  fashionable car on the road,  you
have to follow the traffic  rules.  You cannot  say that I am the owner  of a new car, and
traffic  rules  do not apply  to us. Traffic  rules  are for everybody.  Why are traffic  rules  put
in place? Because there are children crossing the road,  elderly  people are using the
road.  There are two-wheelers  on the road.  There are cars of various  speeds  on the
road.  So, it is the responsibility  of the traffic  police  to ensu re that there are no accidents.
The Reserve Bank  is similarly  placed as a regulator,  which  is entrusted with the
responsibility  of regulating a large part of the financial  sector.  Our endeavour is to
ensure,  to the best of our ability,  that there are no major  accidents.  Accidents  can still
happen,  but our endeavour is to ensure that there are no major  accidents.
We have now deepened our supervision to the extent  that we are able to anticipate
problems  and risk buildup.  All our actions  are determined with the objective of
maintaining  financial  stability,  protecting customers ' interest,  and protecting depositors '
interest,  and wherever  we see a risk building  up, we have to necessarily  take action  in
the overall  public  interest.  So, this is the overall  background for all the regulatory
actions  which  the Reserve Bank  has taken,  not only in the case of Paytm  but in the
case of a few other  regulated entities.  Whenever  we take action you have to see from
where we are coming from.
ET Now :
Are you likely to extend the deadline of 15 March for  Paytm wallet , just because of the
kind of accounts and the pure size it has?
Shaktikanta Das:
Initially , when we gave a time of about a month, we issued t hese orders on 31st
January, and we gave time up to the end of  February. We had made an assessment
and our understanding was that it  would take about  30 days for the whole thing to
stabilis e. We then issued an FAQ, as I mentioned at the Monetary  Policy  Day, in the
middle of February. We thought, since the FAQ  is being issued in the middle of
February, giving clarity on a number of issues and questions which we  had received,
so, we thought it is again appropriate to give one more month of time.
In our  assessment, the time given up to March 15 is sufficient  because if you take into
account the total number of users of the Paytm  payment app, each payment app or
wallet is linked to a bank account , a large part of the users  – about  80-85% of the
customers – of the Paytm payment  app, are linked to other  banks along with Paytm 8 bank or to entirely different banks.  So, about 80% to 85% of the customers who are
using the Paytm  payment app will not be impacted at all because their app is also
linked to  another bank account of theirs  and their payments can go on in a non-
disruptive manner.
The challenge is with regard to those 15% or 20% of the users who have linkage only
with a bank account in the Paytm payment bank . Paytm payment bank has been
advised to shift  these customers to other banks . Other banks are also proactively
onboarding customers and NPCI has also been working closely  with the various banks.
Customers , who are exclusively dependent on payment bank s – 15% to 20% of the
customers  – are getting onboarded to other banks.  I do not  foresee a problem beyond
March 15 and through your  channel , I would like to appeal to everybody  that if your
Paytm app is linked only with P aytm payment bank , please link it to another  bank
account of yours so that you can use Paytm payment app non-d isruptively .
ET Now :
When do you think  NPCI will take a  decision on the Paytm license?
Shaktikanta Das:
I cannot say that.  NPCI has to do its internal due dilige nce. S o far as the RBI is
concerned, w e have informed them that we have no objection if NPCI considers the
Paytm  payment app to continue because our action was against the Paytm payment
bank. The app is with the NPCI. So our action was against the payment bank.  NPCI
will take a call. I would presume they should be taking a call shortly.
ET Now :
To quote your last interview , you said that fintechs are like Ferrari. India still needs an
efficient small car. So  can I assume that now that SROs have been set up, the RBI is
essentially looking at extending the regulation in fintech? Is the soft touch era over?
Shaktikanta Das:
If I can digress a little, t he Indian speed today is not like a small car.  India's economic
growth and the way India is growing like the Tejas aircraft speed. But coming back
specifically to this question, we do not  want to slow down any economic growth.  We
do not  want to slow down the growth of the financial sector. We are completely focused
on the growth of  a robust financial sector  on a sustainable basis.  Growth has to be
sustainable in the long run. If you grow at a very  high speed, just for a few years, and
then if there is  a crash, that  is not on. As a regulator of the financial sector, it is our
effort; it is our responsibility to ensure that the financial sector grows at  a good speed
but in a sustainable manner.
In recent years, we have deepened our supervisory processes and approaches and
we are now keeping a very close watch on activities of not only sectoral , and sub-
secto ral activities  but also monitoring activities of the individual banks or the individual
NBFCs , the larger ones, particularly the top 100 NBFCs , which control roughly abou t
80% to 90% of the NBFC space. So the monitoring, the super vision are now much 9 more active. On the regulatory side, we have completely over hauled the regulatory
architecture in the sense that for NBFCs . We have positioned a scale- based
regulation, we have digital lending guidelines, and we have issued ownership
guidelines  as well as  governance guidelines for scheduled commercial banks. So, we
have brought in a lot of changes on the regulatory side to ensure that our financial
sector remains strong and healthy. On the supervision side also, we have deepened
our supervision to the extent that we constantly monitor what  is happening, both
through offsite as well as onsite methods, including a lot of online information, which
we get to ensure that the I ndian financial sector remains strong and healthy and grows
in a sustainable manner.
ET Now :
Governor, looking at AI, can I say that compliance now will occupy cent re stage , and
the Reserve Bank  of India could also revisit the total penalty  which is there in the
system, which currently is minuscule, considering the global standards for non-
compliance?
Shaktikanta Das:
There are three principles which we highlight ed. Y ou can call them the tripod of
stability. In any financial institution, the tripod of stability that is the management of risk
is ensuring good compliance, ensuring reasonable compliance, a nd the third aspect is
taking the internal audit seriously . Making the internal audit functions very  efficient  and
that is why as a part of our governance  reforms in banks and NBFCs, we have
mandated the creation of dedicated senior- level positions of chief risk officer to look
after risk management . Chief risk offi cer, c hief compliance officer and the head of
internal audit , all these three functions we have spelt out  what are the areas  they
should be looking at . We have sort of mandated that there should be sufficiently senior
officers having the required capabilit y. Ultimately , complian ce is an essential part of
good governance. From the Reserve Bank, we are giving a lot of emphasis on these
three things  – risk management , compliance and the findings of the internal audit, and
how they are being addressed.
ET Now :
There is a war of liability within banks right now, and banks in a sense, are making a
case that, look, we are not getting traditional savings because a lot of money is being
channel lised to stock markets . As an RBI, what is your view? Are savings getting
diverted into stock markets?
Shaktikanta Das:
The whole position is slightly nuanced. If savings are going into stock markets, they
are coming back to a bank.  When you buy a stock, let us say if I am buying some
shares in the secondary market or I participate in an IPO, I make the payment. But
where does that money go? It does  not remain as loose cash. It comes back to the
banking system in somebody else's bank account.  From the point of view of the banks,
probably one set of depositors ’ deposit rates are coming down. T he money is s hifting 10 from one account to the other account. But having said that, the broader  point that  you
are making , and with which I quite agree, is that the growth rate of deposits is in the
order of about 12%, whereas credit is growing at about 16% to 17%. S o there is a kind
of a mismatch.
There will always be a mismatch because it is not that you get ₹ 100 by deposit and
the same 100 alone will be given out as a loan. Out of that ₹100, incidentally, the bank
has to provide for CRR and SLR and other requirements. When one loan gets
sanctioned, money creates money, which  is called the money multiplier. So, you
cannot say that credit cannot grow at  a rate higher than the deposit growth. It will
always grow at a rate higher than the deposit growth. But , there has to be some
correlation between credit growth and deposit growth. Now the deposit growth is in the
region of about 12%  to 13%, and historically , the deposits have grown around 13%-
14%. So, to some extent, there has been some dip in deposits, perhaps because the
propensity to spend more is now . People’s  consumption expenditure is picking up, but
eventually , that money comes back again to somebody else's bank account. A s
economic growth takes a greater foothold, one can expect the savings rate to improve.
If retail savings are not growing, it is  perhaps because of things like investment s in
mutual funds, investment s in shares, or a greater amount of spending which is
undertaken by households.
ET Now :
But is the RBI worried about the kind of options activity which are there in the system?
Loans against securities, is that something which is a bit of a fly in the ointment? Is it
a concern?
Shaktikanta Das:
The R BI has given guidelines about loans against securities to banks and NBFCs . Two
years ago we came out with some guidelines  on NBFCs financing IPOs . Earlier,
NBFCs could give any amount of loan for IPO financing. But , we have set a l imit of
one crore per borrower . So, that is one area where we are constantly monitoring like
any other sector. These are all  under our constant monitoring. A s and when some
action is required, we will take them. A t the moment it is under our surveillance and
that is it.
ET Now :
What about real estate? In the past, the Reserve Bank of India has flagged off
conc erns in the real  estate sector. In the previous cycle, they have taken preemptive
measures.  Where do you see the real estate sector is headed? Are you worried?
Shaktikanta Das:
At the moment, I am not unduly concerned about  the real estate sector as a whole.
Construction activity continues  to be strong and the real estate number may look high
because the HDFC's assets got merged with the H DFC Bank. So both put together, if
you compare year -on-year basis, the real estate sector growth looks high. But if you 11 net out the HDFC component, then the growth of the real estate sector is not something
which worries us at this point of time.
ET Now :
The near -term question, i.e ., bond inclusion . India will be part of the MSCI in dex. Bond
inflows will pick up.  How is  the Reserve Bank preparing the bond market for inflows?
Shaktikanta Das:
Bond market inclusion can act as a double -edged weapon. If there are inflows, there
can be situations  where there are outflows also and that can cause volatility in the
yields . If you are alluding to the expectation of heavy inflows, I would like to say that
so far as  JP Morgan bond index inclusion or yesterday's announcement by Bloomberg;
we are still about a year away from that ; these will come over a period of time. They
are not going to come in one shot. T he Reserve B ank will be able to manage not only
with regard to the inflows but also should the cycle turn. I  am saying should. It is  not a
probabil ity. But you c annot rule out such a scenario. So the Reserve Bank will be able
to handle the kind of inflows or outflows that one can generally associate with bond
inclusion mainly because we have a strong buffer of foreign exchange reserves.
ET Now :
Governor, I will take the liberty of just asking a few questions. Two large questions ,
which will have real long- term structural implications.  First is the Rupee trade as the
trading is now becoming bigger.  We understand that I ndian refineries  are also now
ready to get oil  imports partly paid in the Indian Rupee. Do you see that change
increasing? Do you see now that the Rupee- denominated trade will grow
exponentially ?
Shaktikanta Das:
One has to understand why we are doing Rupee- denominated trade now. Dependence
on one currency for international trade obviously involves a bigger amount of risk.
When your import and export or when your global international trade is dependent on
more than one currency , the risk of exchange rate fluctuation in that single currency,
to that extent, gets minimi sed. We have made a beginning with regard to the Rupee,
that is a local currency  settlement or a rupee- denominated settlement. There are two
different things. One is through the V ostro  account mechanism, where the settlement
is entirely through Rupees. The other one is local currency denominated, meaning if
there are two countries, the respective currencies can be utili sed for settlement. So,
our effort is mainly in that kind of context . We are trying to build it up with countries
with whic h we have a large trade volume. So, we expect this to steadily improve. It
cannot happen overnight. We  expect it to steadily improve. Our officials have had
meetings with the oil companies, and oil market ing companies also, and the effort on
both sides. We have signed the agreement with the UAE . You will very soon see action
with a few other countries also as India and the other country, local currency -
denominated trade agreements being taken forward.  We are working in that direction
and I expect it to grow. The Rupee footprint should grow, especially vis-a-vis the 12 countries with which we have a larger amount of trade and where there are countries
from which we have a great amount of remittances  by Indians , who are working there.
ET Now :
You have called cryptocurrency dangerous, and there was a time when cryptocu rrency
was almost like a mania. Now that crypto and bitcoin prices are coming higher, do you
see the level  of participation is still low, or the level of p articipation of late after the price
hike has also come back again in India?
Shaktikanta Das:
The exuberance which was there two years ago that exuberance is not there. There is
greater awareness among the people about the risks and dangers assoc iated with
crypto. Some people will make money but a large number of people are likely to incur
loss because it is  a speculative product. We have nothing against technology. There
has to be a clear line drawn between the technology on which cryptocurrencies are
based and that t echnology is blockchain technology. We have nothing against it.
Blockc hain has many applications.  It is already under use.  We are using blockchain
technology with regard to our Central Bank Digital Curren cy (CBDC) . So, the
underlying technology is a diff erent  thing altogether and that has to grow.  We,
ourselves,  are using it in our  CBDC, that is the e-R upee .
Every underlying asset needs to have a matching liability. Cryptocurrencies do not
have corresponding liability. This technology is used to develop certain products which
are essentially speculative in nature a nd are traded without any  underlying and
corresponding liabilities.  That is number one.
Number two, there is no underlying and it is a speculative product because without any
underl ying some trading is going on.  I sell you something for ₹ 1,000, you sell it to
somebody for ₹ 2,000, somebody  sells it to another person for ₹ 3,000. But what is the
basis? So, we call it a speculative product.  We have interactions with other central
banks also very  frequently . There is now a greater awareness among the people, not
only in India but internationally .
Yes, at the moment  as you said, some of these products are again being traded at
very high prices.  So there could be some amount of interest which is perhaps more
than what it was one year ago.  But, if you compare it with where we were two years
ago when there was a kind of an exuberance building up today . There is a greater
amount of  realism  now.
ET Now :
When should we expect the full -fledged launch of the digital currency , i.e., r etail digital
currency ?
Shaktikanta Das:
We are in no great hurry to launch the digital currency because we want to be
absolutely sure about the safety , robustness and integrity  of the digital currency.  So, it
is a pilo t project which  we are running a nd even the pilot project size itself is now very 13 high.  The number of users, retail  users of CBDC today is about 4.3 million, i.e., about
43 lakh users of retail CBDC are there.  The number of merchants , who are using
CBDC, is about 40 lakhs.  So, 47 lakh merchants and users are a part of the pilot
project.
We are learning from our experience that new challenges and new issues keep
cropping up, both in terms of tec hnology, sometimes certain questions around the
safety features,  and certain questions about the speed of transactions.
We are developing the product ourselves and we want to ensure that when we are
absolutely confident with the safety features and the integrity of the currency , that
perhaps will  be the right time to launch it in a full -fledged manner. But , we have no
timeline or no target date.  It all depends on when we feel that yes, we are ready to
launch
ET Now :
Sir, there is no downtime in the RBI, but is there a downtime in the Governor's life? D o
you ever get a Sunday?
Shaktikanta Das:
It is a part of the job and I cannot  complain.  If you have accepted a position, you have
to also accept the challenges which are associated with it.
ET Now :
I am sure when you get a chance to watch  TV. You prefer watching ET  now.
Shaktikanta Das:
Yeah, of course . You want me to endorse ET Now . I will not endorse it, but I do watch
ET Now and that  is why I  am here.
ET Now :
Governor, if a pantheon of great thinkers and great governors has to be made, your
name will always be there on the pedestal. It is a very proud moment for us when there
is a global acknowledgement as to kind of things which the RBI as an institution has
adopted under your leadership. But Sir, you come, unlike your peers,  not from a
traditional economics background. W e are living in a complex world.  How do you
simplify things? How do you start? How do you judge? W hat data points do you refer
to?
Shaktikanta Das:
First and the foremost, one has to  see the larger world. You have to first see the big
picture and then you have to zero in on the micro details  and you have to do a kind of
granular analysis.  One cannot emulate the great warrior A rjuna, but as long as you
see the larger picture, as long as you are focused on the larger picture, what is t he
larger picture for the RBI? The larger picture is to ensure financial stability in the
country and to support growth.  14 Of late, things like supporting innovation, supporting technology, making payments
user-friendly  and financial inclusion. One has to look at all these things, look at  the
larger picture and then zero  in on various components of it and decide your action
accordingly.