1 Innovations in Banking  - The emerging role for Technology  and AI1
(Remarks delivered  virtually  by Shri M. Rajeshwar  Rao,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve Bank  of India
– December  22, 2023 - at the 106th Annual  Conference  of Indian  Economic  Association  in Delhi)
Distinguished participants,  Good  Morning.
1. At the outset,  let me thank the organisers for inviting me and giving this
opportunity  to share a few thoughts on this very pertinent  theme of
finance,  banking  and technology.  In my address,  I would  largely  focus  on
RBI’s  efforts  to foster  innovation in financial  ecosystem  and how the
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence  are likely  to reshape
the financial  landscape.
2. The banks  have  played an extremely  important  role in supporting  the
growth story  of the Indian  economy.  If we were  to analyse the evolution
of Indian banking sector  over the last 5 decades,  we can classify  this
evolution  in three  distinct  phases  – post nationalisation,  liberalisation,  and
the third and current  phase which  we could  term as democratisation.
3. The level of financial intermediation  at the time of independence was
quite  low in India – ranging below  10 per cent of the GDP.  This was, more
or less, the case  over the next two decades  or so. With limited
financialisation  and outreach of banking  services,  the scope to mobilise
deposits,  facilitate  credit  flow, and support  the aspirations of a developing
nation  was constrained.  But this trend  changed with the nationalisation of
banks which ensured  wider  banking  reach.  This led to opening  of bank
branches across the country resulting  in greater  mobilisation  of deposits
and growth in credit,  primarily  for catering to the credit  needs of priority
sectors.
1 Inputs  provided by Chandan  Kumar,  Pradeep  Kumar  and Saurabh  Pratap  Singh are gratefully  acknowledged.  2
Figure  1: Historical  overview  of Indian  Banking
4. The second  distinctive phase  in the evolution of the banking sector  was
observed during  post-liberalisation  phase  (from  1991)  till about  2003- 04.
During  this period,  financial intermediation  was fundamentally
transformed as globalisation  and integration  opened  up various growth
opportunities  leading  to increase in demand  for credit.  Also, in tune with
the spirit  of economic  reforms,  private entities  were  allowed  to enter
banking sector,  and they supplemented  the collective endeavour  of
banking industry  to support  the growth  story.  Economic  growth  aided by
institutional and other  attendant  reforms  along with greater  technological
adoption in the banking  sector spurred a robust  growth  in both deposit
and credit  during  this period.
5. While  the first two events  (namely  nationalisation  and liberalisation) are
definitive  in nature,  i.e., we can attribute  definite  time stamps  for these
events,  the third phase – democratization of banking services,  which  we
are currently  experiencing,  is continuing  as a gradual  but transformative
process,  the pace  of which  has accelerated over the last few years.  This
democratisation phase  has coagulated  of late, underpinned by the trinity
of financial  inclusion,  increase  in financial  literacy,  and focus on
Nationalisation  Liberalisation  Democratisation  3 consumer  protection.  This phase  has also witnessed  massive  expansion
of banking  outreach,  especially amongst  the hitherto  “excluded”  sections
through innovative  delivery  models  such as the use of banking
correspondents.  This democratisation of financial  services got a major
push through Pradhan  Mantri Jan Dhan  Yojana  and direct  benefit  transfer
(DBT)  scheme  along  with proliferation  of mobile  and telecom  services.  I
would  not be off the mark  when  I say that that this phase has been a
perfect  combination  of demand -pull and supply- push models  working in
tandem.  Today,  we are witnessing  the unfolding of true democratisation
of financial  services where  customers  are greatly  enabled to make
informed  choices among  the suit of available  financial  products offered
by banks  and other  financial  service providers.
6. While  we are discussing the role of banks  in India’s  economic  journey,
let’s not lose sight  of the contribution  and the increasing  importance  of
other  financial intermediaries.  Although bank  credit  remains  the dominant
mode  for meeting  the growing  credit  needs  of commercial  and household
sectors,  the share  of non-bank financial  companies,  micro -finance
institutions  and of late, market  instruments  has also been  increasing.
Non-banks,  through their innovative  delivery and appraisal  methods,
have further expanded  the penetration  of credit  across  the geographical
length and breadth  of the country.  They  have,  along with banks,
contributed immensely  to this journey  of democratisation of financial
services.  4
Figure  2: Flows  of resources to commercial  sector  (₹ Lakh  Cr)
7. India  has made  remarkable  progress over the years  to become  the fifth
largest  economy  today.  It is also poised  to become  the third largest
economy over the next few years  and have  the aspiration  of becoming  a
developed  nation  by 2047.  Reserve  Bank  too has played a crucial  role in
unfolding of this growth  story.  We are one of the very few central  banks
around the world  which  has been entrusted with a developmental  mandate
along with traditional central  banking functions.
8. For the next phase  of development  of our financial architecture to support
the aspirational  growth  of a rapidly  growing economy , the RBI is creating
world  class financial  infrastructure.  Let me cite a few examples.  Today,
India  has one of the most  advanced state -of-the-art payments system  that
is affordable,  accessible,  convenient,  fast, safe and secure.  Our payment
infrastructure  caters  to the needs  of a diverse  group of consumers and
offers  a wide array of options for executing all types  of transactions.  This
has led to a revolution  in banking  and financial  services  making  the
banking truly ‘anytime,  anywhere’.  Everyone  is aware  of the success  of
UPI and the convenience it offers.  UPI symbolises  the ultimate
democratisation of a financial product  which is available to everyone
5 including  to customers  who may not have smartphone s as well as for
undertaking offline  transactions.  To put things in perspective,  during  the
FY 2022 -23, UPI facilitated  about  83 billion  transactions  with approximate
value of ₹140 trillion.  This is roughly 43% of total value of retail payment
transaction s2.
9. Another  technological  initiative  where the RBI has emerged  as a leader  is
the Central  Bank  Digital Currency  (CBDC).  We were  one of the few major
economies to launch  CBDCs  when  we launched pilot phases  of wholesale
and retail CBDC in October  and November  2022, respectively.  Apart  from
its own initiatives,  the RBI has facilitated  technological  innovations in
banking,  non-banking,  payment  systems and financial  markets  space.
With its commitment  to technology- led innovations,  the RBI has set-up the
Reserve Bank  Innovation  Hub (RBIH)  to accelerate  innovation across  the
spectrum  of financial services.  In addition,  the RBI has also instituted  a
regulatory  sandbox  to provide  a platform  for start-ups, fintech’s  and other
entities  to test and experiment  with new produ cts in a controlled
environment.
10. Discussions about  emerging technologies offers  an opportunity to dwell  a
bit on how the financial  industry  would  need to interact  with the newer
technologies and the breakthroughs in areas such  as artificial  intelligence.
11. At different  points of time,  there  have  been breakthroughs which have
redefined the future  evolution  of human  societies  such  as the invention of
the wheel,  the steam  engine,  development  of vaccines,  the computer,  and
more  recently  internet  and mobile  phon es. The emergence  of Artificial
Intelligence  or AI as it is commonly known,  is also being cited  as being  in
the same league  and proponents of AI sound convinced that it is going  to
transform  the future.  I am no expert  on technology and my focus  is limited
to understanding its implications  for the economy and the financial sector.
2 https://www.npci.org.in/PDF/npci/statics/Retail -Payments- Statistics -Nov23.pdf   6 Therefore,  let me share  a few thoughts on the adoption of AI by the banking
and financial services sector  and risks and rewards  that this may entail.
12. As I understand,  AI models can be placed  in two categories  – the first set
is the traditional  AI models while  the second is categorised as generative
AI or GenAI.  The differentiation  between  the two is based  on their
capabilities  and applications.  Most  of the AI models  currently available are
in the form of traditional AI and have been designed to perform  a particular
task or set of tasks  by responding  to a set of inputs  or instructions.
Traditional AI models can also learn  and identify  patterns  from the
available data set and can make  predictions based on the available data.
However,  they can only respond  within  the pre-defined  boundaries and
follow  specific  pre-set rules.
13. The development  of GenAI  – a type of AI technology that can produce
various  types  of content,  including text, imagery,  audio and synthetic  data
– has garnered a very strong  interest  about  its potential  economic  impact.
It is said that the GenAI  possesses general  intelligence  and cognitive
abilities  comparable to those  of a human being.  It is not confined to a
specifi c set of tasks but can adapt  and learn  in various  domains,
demonstrating a level of autonomy,  reasoning,  and problem -solving
capabilities.
14. Current  estimates on AI’s boost  to productivity and economic growth  are
substantial  but highly  uncertain.  Academic  research suggests that workers
in early  AI-adopting  firms  experience higher  labour  productivity growth;
most  estimates  imply  around a 2–3 percentage point  increase  per year.
One estimate by Goldman  Sachs3 suggests that generative AI could,
ceteris paribus,  boost  global  GDP  by about  7 percentage  points  over a 10-
year period.
3 https://www.gspublishing.com/content/research/en/reports/2023/10/30/2d567ebf -0e7d -4769- 8f01-
7c62e894a779.html   7
15. In the financial  sector,  we are seeing  several  banks and non-banks
experimenting with AI. Global  experience , so far, however,  suggests that
such deployment  is mostly  limited  to back -office  work  and optimisation  of
business processes  to deliver  efficiency  gains.  Some  of the banks have
also deployed  AI solution to manage  compliance requirements  which  are
routine  in nature,  for identification  of patterns  in transactions or payment
to detect  money laundering  attempts  or for facilitating  cross- border
transactions  and settlements.  Some  entities  have  also reported to deploy
AI solutions in customer  facing processes such  as for making  lending
decisions or identification  of target  customer  segments.
16. Given  its transformative nature and potential,  if realised,  generative  AI
could have  a deep impact,  on productivity,  jobs and income distribution.
The advocates  of AI expect  widespread benefits for the economy and
society,  including increase  in income  levels,  automation  of repetitive  tasks
and obtaining better insights by combining  different  sets of information  and
data which  may be otherwise  difficult  for human  processing.  There are
others who are more  sceptical  and point  to several  societal  consequences,
including increased unemployment.  They also point  out that if the long-
term benefits  are largely benign,  the reallocation of resources  and labour
in the transition  could be challenging.  We have also seen these  concerns
being expressed  in India  with reference  to IT sector,  but the debate is
ongoing and is unlikely to be settled  in near future.
17. Let me however  flag a few concerns and also elucidate our expectations
from the financial  institutions  deploying  AI in their business processes and
decision making.  While  some of these concerns are design specific risks
such  as biases  and robustness  issues,  others are more  traditional and user
specific such  as data privacy, cybersecurity,  consumer  protection  and
preserving  financial  stability. These issues  could  be placed  into three  8 broad categories – data bias and robustness,  governance and
transparency.
Data  Bias and Robustness
18. AI is as good  as a the data on which is has been  trained  and thus inherits
the issues,  biases  and errors  in its training  data.  Human  beings
accumulate such  training  data over a lifetime  of exposures,  experiences,
evidences,  and upbringing.  That makes us capable of coming to different
conclusion based on the same  data set. Further, humans  can collaborate,
combine and brainstorm  to reach  at an optimal solution.  This is not to say
that humans  are free of biases,  but we have embedded checks  and
balances  in the institutional  decision making framework  to check and
prevent  them.
19. Whereas  traditional financial  models  are usually rules- based  with explici t
fixed  parameterisation,  AI models drastically change the process  as they
are able to learn  the rules  and alter model  parameterisation  iteratively.
This aspect  makes  many  AI models a black box which are difficult  to
decode for audit  and supervisory review . Besides,  there  are several  risks
and vulnerabilities  such  as arbitrary  code execution4, data poisoning5,
data drift6, unexpected behaviour7, and bias predictions8 which  financial
institution  need to be careful  about  while  deploying  AI models
4 A vulnerability  where an attacker  can inject  and execute unauthorized  code  within  an AI/ML  model,  potentially
leading  to malicious actions  and compromising  system  integrity.
5 The manipulation  of training  data  with  malicious intent  to influence  the performance of an AI/ML  model,
causing  it to make  incorrect  predictions  or exhibit  biased  behaviour.
6 The phenomenon  where the statistical  properties  of the input  data  for an AI/ML  model  change  over  time,
potentially  causing  a decline  in performance  as the model may  become  less accurate  or reliable.
7 An undesirable  and unpredictable  response  or output  from  an AI/ML  model,  often  occurring  in situations
outside  its training  data  distribution  or due to unanticipated inputs.
8 The manifestation  of unfair  or discriminatory  behaviour  in an AI/ML  model's predictions,  influenced by biased
training  data  or the algori thm itself,  leading  to unequal  treatment of different  groups.  9 Governance
20. AI may also pose some  novel  challenges for governance,  especially
where  the technology is used  to facilitate  autonomous decision- making
and may limit or even potentially  eliminate  human  judgement  and
oversight.  Some  of the data and model  issues such as prompt injection9,
hallucinations10 and toxic output11 can also have implications  for
governance frameworks,  especially in financial  institutions.  This may
necessitate that regulators and the management  have a re-look at the
frameworks  for consumer  protection,  cybersecurity and data privacy.
21.  Some  suggestions  have been  made  to overcome  governance issues
including  the option of ‘putting  a human in the loop’  to help build  trust in
the AI driven systems.  Financial  institutions  would  therefore need to
institute  gove rnance structures that oversee the entire  lifecycle  of AI
systems,  specially  the GenAI  - from data acquisition  to model  training  and
continuous evaluation.  Regular  audits  and assessments would also be
essential  to verify  the fairness,  accountability,  and compliance  of AI
applications with extant  laws and regulatory standards.
Transparency
22. The AI models are inherently  complex  and opaque requiring  extra  caution
to ensure accountability.  For this reason,  financial  institutions  may find it
difficult  to explain an adverse  or biased  decision outcome from an AI
model  to customer  or supervisors.  The self-learning capability  may make
the model  discriminatory  and induce behavioural  biases  after some  time.
For example,  an algorithm  may predict  gender  of potential  target
9 An attack  involving  the insertion  of carefully  crafted  input  prompts  to manipulate  the output  of a language
model,  leading  to undesired  or potentially  harmful  responses.
10 An AI/ML  model's tendency  to generate  outputs  that are not grounded in reality  or data  it has been  trained
on, leading  to the creation  of false  or nonsensical  information.
11 The generation  of harmful,  offensive,  or inappropriate  content  by an AI/ML  model,  often  reflecting  the biases
present  in its training  data and posing  risks  in applications  such  as natural  language  generation  or image
synthesis.  10 customer  from shopping history  of a person  or ethnicity from location
data.  How do institutions  overcome these challenges  in a transparent
manner  is the key to widespread adoption  and use of AI.
23. In this context,  let me outline  ten aspects , which financial  institutions
looking to deploy AI based models,  may consider  while  designing  AI
solutions in order  to strike  a balance between  innovation  and responsible
use of technology;  to ensure fairness,  prevent  biases, and safeguard
consumer  privacy.  These  are:
i) Fairness:  It should be ensured  that the algorithm  does not discriminate
against  anyone  based  on attributes  which  are otherwise  considered
unethical  or prohibited by law. This can be achieved  by conducting
regular  fairness audits of the algorithm s and outcomes including  external
validation  and by employing  techniques to identify  and rectify  any
unintended biases.
ii) Transparency:  All stakeholders should  be aware  about  what  are the
inputs and how the decisions are being arrived  at. This should  be
achieved by making  the algorithmic  decision- making process
understandable and explainable to both regulators and consumers.
iii) Accuracy:  The entities  deploying  AI should strive  for accurate and
appropriate training  data to minimize  errors  in decision  making.
Identifying  and understanding the types  of errors  the AI model s make  and
continuously work  to minimize  false  positives and negatives  is the key.
iv) Consistency:  The entities  should  ensure  consistent  application  of the
algorithm  across different  situations  to avoid biases or unfair  advantages
and to ensure equitable  outcomes.  Parameters entering  the models also
need to be consistent  and too frequent  changes  to suit specific  interests
need to be eschewed.
v) Data  Privacy: In today’s  digitized  world , adhering  to data protection
regulations and ensur ing that personal  information  is handled securely  11 and responsibly is of utmost  importance.  Therefore,  AI model  should be
designed  to adhere  to data protection  protocols  and regulations  and
entities  should ensure that personal  information  is always handled
securely and responsibly.
vi) Explainability : The entities  shall be able to provide clear  explanations for
the factors  influencing  decisions or output  to enhance transparency and
build  trust in AI models.  Clear  understanding of the inputs,  processes  and
output  by the entities and establishing  channels  for redressal  of customer
queries or disputes will help in promoting  trust.
vii) Accountability : Clear  lines of accountability  for the outcomes  of
algorithmic  decisions shall be ensured by making it clear  who is
responsible for the performance,  robustness and fairness  of the model.
Entities  should implement  a comprehensive governance framework  that
includes regular  audits,  internal  reviews,  and external  assessments to
hold individ uals responsible for addressing any issues related  to the AI
model.
viii) Robustness : The entities  must  undertake rigorous  validation  and testing
to ensure that the algorithm  performs  well under  different  conditions and
is not overly sensitive  to minor  changes  in input  data.  Regularly updating
the model's  training  data to include a broad spectrum  of conditions,
ensuring adaptability  to changes  in the economic  landscape  and
maintaining robust  performance  over time is also critical.
ix) Monitoring  and Updating:  Regular ly monitoring  the performance of AI
engine s and updat ing them  as may be required  to adapt  to changing
market  conditions  and emerging risks may have to be ensured.  Also,
monitoring  the evolution  of self-learning  algorithms  is critical  to ensure
that they continue  to perform  as envisaged originally.
x) Human Oversight : The entities  should  include human  oversight  to
address complex or ambiguous cases and to ensure  that ethical  12 considerations are taken into account.  This would  also ensure that any
unintended consequences  and governance issues are detected in a
timely  manner  and addressed.
24. I think  that incorporating these  aspects would help in developing the public
trust if we truly want  to exploit  the transformative  potential  of AI. Let me
also point  out that in addition  to institution  specific  challenges,  there are
several  geopolitical and systemic issues which would  also engage  us
going forward.  For example,  like any other  technological  development  of
the past,  the access  of technology is going to be uneven  among  countries.
Advanced  economies (AEs)  may stand  to benefit  more  than emerging
market  economies  (EMEs)  due to the fact that EMEs’  have  higher  share
of employment  in sectors such  as agriculture and construct ion which would
inherently have less opportunities  for application of AI.
25. In addition  to the above,  there  are only a handful  of entities  globally  which
have the large amount  of data available to train GenAI  models.  This could
give rise to the questions  of market  power,  competition  and cross
jurisdictional  issues.
26.  To conclude,  let me say that as our banking sector  evolves,  emerging
technologies and AI will play a significant  role in the process.  We need  to
ensure a supportive  regulatory framework  to harne ss its benefits  while  being
mindful  of any potential  adverse impacts and therefore robust  governance
arrangements and clear  accountability  frameworks  are important  when  AI
models are deployed in high- value decision- making use cases.
Development  and deploym ent of AI models  need close  human  supervision
commensurate with the risks that could materialize from employing  the
technology by the financial  institutions.  As the adoption of AI is increasing,
global  efforts  to develop regulatory frameworks  to help guide the use of AI
applications,  are also increasing  and greater  cooperation in this process
would  be required.  Our collective  endeavour  should be to embrace this 13 evolution  with mindfulness and a sense  of responsibility,  while  committing
to a future  where technology  serves  as an enabler  for the society  at large.
*****