1 Edited Transcript of the Governor ’s Interaction with Bloomberg at the
World Economic Forum  2024  at Davos on January 18, 2024
Haslinda Amin:
Preoccupation right now in the markets and everywhere else is rate cuts . When can
we expect the RBI to cut rates?
Shaktikanta Das:
That will depend on the incoming data. That will depend on the outlook. I find that
financial markets all over the world have started talking about rate cuts, whereas the central banks are nowhere near  it as per the statements which are coming out from
various central banks. So far as India is concerned, inflation has moderated steadily
from the peak of 7.8% which we saw immediately after the onset of the Ukraine war .
It has come within our target range of 2%  to 6%, but our target being 4%,  we are still
moving towards 4%. Till we reach 4% on a durable basis , it will be too premature to
talk about rate cuts in the context of India.
Haslinda Amin:
But expectations are that you will get to 4% before 2025, which means you will get
there this year. Could we  possibly  see rate cuts in the second half ?
Shaktikanta Das:
I have said yesterday in another forum that our expectation of average headline inflation for the next year 2024- 25 starting from the first of April, is 4.5% with several
ups and downs. U nless we reach 4%, and unless we see clear evidence that it is going
to sustain at that  level, it will be really premature to talk about rate cuts and at the
moment as I speak to you, the topic of rate cuts in that aspect is not on our table, it  is
not even under discussion. Our focus is now to remain actively disinflationary to bring inflation  to 4%.
Haslinda Amin:
So, no cuts in 2024.
Shaktikanta Das:
As we stand today, as I sit here with you, depending on whatever  forecast we have
given, i t will again depend on so many uncertainties happening both ways. There are
new geopolitical flashpoints developing,  climate change, and weather -related events
are also affecting food prices, new bottlenecks and impediments to global supply value
chains are also coming up. So,  on the matter of rate  cuts, whether it will happen during 2 2024 or 2025, whether it will not happen, I would not like to give any kind of forward
guidance. I would just like to say that our policy currently is actively disinflationary  and
we will remain actively disinflationary till we reach the 4% target on a durable basis.
Haslinda Amin:
How closely are you watching the Fed?
Shaktikanta Das:
Definitely what the Fed does with regard to i ts rates is  very important but  let me also
clarify and add that our decisions with regard to inflation,  in terms of  rates , and in terms
of liquidity are dependent entirely on domestic factors. That is the domestic inflation
growth dynamics and the outlook in particular.
Haslinda Amin:
Do you see the Fed cutting rates this year? Markets started talking about six rate cuts,
but are now pulling back.
Shaktikanta Das:
The markets all over are running ahead of central banks and that  should not happen .
If they  are not ahead of the central bank s, what happens is they build up expectations
and the behavio ur of the market and the participants in the market, it goes in a
particular direction. Almost every central bank repeatedly is  saying that we are being
very careful and all that,  but the markets are running ahead.  So far as India is
concerned,  the Reserve Bank and the markets , the thought process and the outlook
as far as I can see, they are well aligned.
Haslinda Amin:
The RBI is  expecting 7% growth this year. That  is less than what the G overnment is
expecting, which is 7.3%. Are you being too conservative? People are talking about
India's moment.
Shaktikanta Das:
The projection that we had made for the current year, which will end on 31st of March,
that is the current Financial Year  2023- 24, was 6.5%. The market consensus was also
somewhere around 6.5%. In October , in one public event, I made a statement that I
would not be surprised if the growth touches 7% and thereafter in the next Monetary
Policy meeting, we said officially that we w ould reach 7% growth in the current financial
year. The day I said that we would  touch 7% , the entire market thought that  we were
probably being very optimistic. A large part of the market was unwilling to believe, but 3 a good part of the market adjusted their  forecasts accordingly. So,  when we said 7%
it was seen not as conservative, it was seen as optimistic, but now the National
Statistical Office (NSO), which has  access to  several other data and later data because
we said it in October, whereas what the NSO  said is very recently. So,  they had
subsequent period data also and they have said 7.3% . For the next financial year , i.e.,
beginning from April 1, 2024- 25, my sense is that the GDP growth will touch 7% and
when that happens, India w ill have recorded GDP growth that is real GDP growth of
7% or above for four consecutive years.
Haslinda Amin:
Some say that it is not enough. Your predecessor, Raghuram Rajan said that you need
growth in excess of 8% to address the unemployment problem , to create more jobs
that are needed in the country. When might you get there and is he right in his
assessment ?
Shaktikanta Das:
I do not want to comment on whether somebody is right  or wrong. B ut my answer
would be as follows.  The growth has picked up. In fact, when COVID happened, all
naysayers said,  India was finished, India w ould not be able to recover  but India has
shown tremendous recovery , the turnaround of the broader economy,  the turnaround
of the macroeconomy, the turnaround of the financial sector, in particular , the banking
sector has been remarkable and it is recording a growth of 7% or above.  The growth
momentum continues  and growth next year also will be 7% because the m omentum
of growth, the momentum of activity looks well maintained and is holding its ground.
With regard to unemployment, let's put the record straight. The official data released
by the agencies which monitor all these data, the statistical organi sations  of the
Government  come out with the annual periodical Labor Force Survey  (PLFS) .
According to the PLFS , the unemployment rate in India, which was 6% in 2017 -18 has
come down to 3.2% in 2022-23. Within that , the labor force participation has also gone
up and the participation of women labor in particular has seen a very steep increase.
What I would like to say is that growth has been good and is holding its momentum ,
and jobs are being created.  We need to recogni se and accept what the numbers are
actually showing . Even in rural areas, as our experience has shown in recent months,
particularly since the beginning of the current financial year, jobs are being created.
Agriculture has recovered substantially in the current crop cycle.  There was a shortfall 4 in sewing, but now it has picked up and almost reached last year's levels. That is
providing a lot of jobs. The demand for what is called the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Program me, that pressure is also not so much now. So,  jobs are getting
created.  Therefore, instead of looking at the numbers, whether 7, 8, 9 , we have to see
the broad momentum, the broad direction and whether the movement which we are
making, the direction of our growth whether that is well sustained.