Safeguarding Financial Stability: The Crucial Role of
Assurance Functions
(Speech by Shri Swaminathan J, Deputy Governor , at the Conference for Heads of
Assurance Functions  in Mumbai on January 10, 2024)
Chief Compliance Officers, Chief Risk Officers, Heads of Internal
Audit, colleagues from the Reserve Bank of India,  Ladies,  and
Gentlemen. A happy New Year and good afternoon to all of you .
1. I am delighted to address you today as we gather for this
inaugural  conference of Heads of Assurance functions. Last year, in
our engagements with the Boards of both Public and Private Sector Banks, Governor had emphasized the importance of independence
of assurance functions as well as their right to constructively challenge business functions for establishing a strong compliance
and risk culture.  Indeed, this conference today is a testament to the
significant importance the Reserve Bank attaches to the assurance
functions  in the context of safeguarding financial integrity and
promoting regulatory compliance.
2.  Undoubtedly, these are good times for the financial services
industry, characterized by robust parameters of performance and
2
soundness. This enviable position is owed, in no small measure, to
the hard work and unwavering dedication of the compliance, risk
management, and internal audit functions. However, our success
should not lull us into complacency. Vigilance and a proactive alert
stance are essential to identifyin g and mitigating risks that may
emerge on the horizon.
3. As custodians of financial stability, we must be acutely alert  to
the risks emanating from both familiar and unforeseen sources.
Risks may be inherent in the business model such as over -
concentration to a particular sector  or sources  of funding.  They
could also arise due to inadequate oversight over operations , more
so in vulnerable areas like outsourcing.  The growing use of
technology and the pervasive digitalisation of finance bring forth
new challenges, notably in the form of cyber- security risks.  Then
there is also the ever- growing  threat of climate risks. In this milieu,
assurance functions, acting as the extended arms of supervision,
are crucial in identifying , escalating,  and facilitating  the proactive
management of risks  and preventing them from ballooning  into a
crisis.
3
4.   Indeed, the assurance functions serve as the indispensable
foundation, ensuring not only the stability of the individual financial
institution but also the resilience of t he broader financial system.
Supervision,  as I am about to explain,  comes in much later after the
four lines of defence.
a. As you are aware, t he first line of defence operates at the
business unit level itself  and involves proactive risk
management embedded within the daily operations of the bank.
Here, assurance functions play a crucial role in fostering a
culture of risk awareness and compliance at every level.
b. The second line builds on this foundation by establi shing robust
risk management frameworks, policies, and procedures. Compliance and Risk Management  functions, with their
independence and expertise, contribute significantly to shaping
and monitoring these frameworks.
c. The third line of defence centres aroun d internal audit,
providing an objective and systematic evaluation of the
effectiveness of risk management and internal controls. Internal
audit  contributes  substantially to this line by ensuring an
4
independent and comprehensive coverage, thorough
examinat ions, and insightful recommendations.
d. If we take external audit as the fourth line of defence,
Supervision, then, becomes the f ifth line of defence,
complementing the groundwork laid by the assurance functions. Supervisory oversight, while essential, is most effective when supported by a strong foundation of risk -
awareness, well -defined risk management  and compliance
practices, as well as  robust internal  and external audits.
5. The seamless collaboration between these lines of defenc e
can form a formidable shield, safeguarding not only individual banks
but the entire financial system against potential threats and
vulnerabilities.   Therefore, the efficacy of assurance functions is not
just a matter of internal governance but a lynchpin for the overall
health of  the financial ecosystem.
6. The Reserve Bank has always been cognizant of the
important role played by the internal assurance functions.  More than
three decades ago the position of ‘ Compliance Officer’  was
formalised in 1992 based on the recommendations of the
5
‘Committee on Frauds and Malpractices in Banks’  (also know as the
Ghosh Committee).  Apart from the compliance function, several
instructions have also been issued on risk management and internal
audit as well .  A key underlying principle repeatedly emphasised in
various RBI guidelines and instructions is that assurance functions
should have adequate independence and stature within the
organisation to function effectively.
7. I would now like to highl ight some specific aspects in the
domain of compliance, risk management and internal audit, where I
believe there can be greater focus and attention.
Compliance
8. The Compliance function is at the forefront of ensuring the
integrity of banking operations.  I would urge you to adopt a
‘regulation- plus’ approach, where the institution not only meets but
exceeds regulatory expectations.  The compliance function must go beyond mere adherence to regulatory requirements.  Compliance
officers must endeavour to ensure that products,  processes,  and
outcomes  fully comply not only with the letter of the law or
regulation, but also the spirit and intent. This approach ensures not
6
only regulatory compliance but also the cultivation of a culture that
prioritizes ethical conduct and sound business practices.
9. We wo uld also like C ompliance Officers to give due attention
to the Risk Assessment Report (RAR) observations and Risk Mitigation Plans (RMP).  To ensure sustained compliance, it is
important to address the root cause of the observations.  Further,
there should be no compromise on the agreed timelines  for RMP ,
and the bank should ensure that all  RMP and RAR  observations are
comprehensively addressed well before the start of the next
inspection cycle.  Pending compliance paragraphs is not a desirable
situation and may be a reflection of the lack of due attention by the
management as well as the Board. Such instances  can also invite
stern supervisory action.
10. As you would be aware, the RBI in 2022 introduced the
DAKSH platform, which is a web-based end- to-end workflow
application with anytime -anywhere secure access that inter -alia
facilitates focussed compliance monitoring.  Apart from using
DAKSH, I would encourage Compliance teams to explore IT
solutions for monitoring of internal compliance as well.
7
Risk Management
11. Risk management should ensure that the strategic business
and capital plans are properly aligned with the risk appetite of the
bank.  The Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process or
ICAAP under Pillar 2 is crucial in this regard.  Pillar 2 acknowledges
that the minimum regulatory requirements stipulated under Pillar 1
may not capture the full spectrum of risks that a bank faces.
Therefore, the ICAAP provides a forward- looking mechanism for
banks to comprehensively assess and manage their internal capital needs, by considering a broad range of risks.  Banks should learn
to recognise its inherent value and use ICA AP document as a
strategic tool to align capital plans with risk appetite and risk assessment.
12. The other aspect I would like to highlight is the meticulous
monitoring of  risk limits.  Frequent breaches in risk limits, coupled
with their non -ratification or their routine ratification, poses
substantial dangers to the stability and integrity of financial institutions that extend beyond the immediate financial implications.
If breaches b ecome normalized or overlooked, employees may
perceive risk limits as mere guidelines rather than non- negotiable
8
boundaries, thereby compromising the institution's overall risk
awareness.  Therefore, it is imperative to address breaches
systematically, conduct thorough investigations, and implement corrective measures to fortify the risk management practices.
Internal Audit
13. As regards Internal Audit, very often we come across
deficiencies in the scoping, coverage,  and periodicity as well as
issues in indepe ndence of the internal audit function. Proper
scoping, periodicity, and independence in risk- based internal audit
are essential components of a robust governance and risk management framework.
14. The scoping process should be aligned with the organization's
risk profile. It involves identifying and prioritizing key risk areas that warrant thorough examination.  The internal audit should not just
rely on the audit reports of a branch/ division but have a program for
centralised off -site analytics to timely identify any unusual trend or
outliers, examine their materiality and have these rectified by instituting system level controls.   I would encourage internal audit to
increasingly leverage technology, including usage of  Artificial
9
Intelligence and Machine Learning to facilitate early identification of
key risk areas.
15. The periodicity of internal audit should be responsive to the
dynamic nature of the risk environment.  High- risk areas may
necessitate more frequent audits,  while lower- risk areas may be
subject to less frequent but regular assessments.  In addition to
regular audits, a continuous monitoring framework should be in
place to detect and respond to risks in real -time.
Independence of Assurance Functions
16. Before I  conclude, I would like to delve upon the importance
of independence of assurance functions.  These functions serve as
a critical check and balance within the governance structure of an organization.  Therefore, i ndependence of assurance functions is
fundamental for ensuring that assurance activities are conducted
with integrity, objectivity, and effectiveness.   As Heads of Assurance
functions, you play a critical role in upholding the integrity and effectiveness of your respective functions within your organizations.
You must be vigilant in protecting the independence  of these roles,
resisting compromises that may arise due to dual hatting or other conflicting roles.  While business owners may be known risk takers
10
in pursuit of their business goals,  I would urge upon the heads of
assurance functions to be the conscience keepers and not allow
themselves to be influenced by some short -term priorities.
17. Very often some friends in the industry confide that only
managing a business function improves career prospects as
compared to managing assurance functions which are considered
typically non glamorous.   I can assure you from  my personal
experience that this is not the case.  Promotions are based on a
combination of individual performance, skills, and organizational
needs. Executives who demonstrate excellence, leadership, and a
commitment to contributing to the organization's su ccess are bound
to advance in their careers, regardless of whether they are in
assurance functions or other areas in the bank.
Conclusion
18. In conclusion, this inaugural conference of Heads of
Assurance functions underscores the significant  role these functi ons
play in upholding financial stability.  As we navigate good times in the financial services industry, let us not become complacent.
Instead, we must remain alert  by proactively identifying and
mitigating emerging risks. Most importantly, the commitment to
11
independence and effectiveness in our assurance functions is not
just a matter of internal governance but a cornerstone for the overall
health of the financial ecosystem.
19. With this, I would once again like to extend my warm wishes
to each one of you for a very Happy New Year. May the coming year
bring success, prosperity, and fulfilment in both your professional
and personal endeavours. As we embark on new challenges and
opportunities, may our collective efforts contribute to the continued
growth and resilience of the financial sector.
20. Thank you.
**********