1 Governor’s interaction during Mint BFSI Summit & Awards
2024 on January 11, 2024 (Edited Excerpts)
Moderator :
Thank you, Governor . Lots of interesting comments  you made in your speech.
I would like to start with what you said towards the end,  where you said,  in your
interaction with some bank CEOs , they had some areas of concern and I
remember at the time when the RBI had raised the risk weights on unsecured
loans , you had called it a pre-emptive measure. So, are there any other areas
which make you a little bit worried and where you will now direct your lens with
more intensity ?
Shaktikanta Das:
Thank you. At the moment , the Indian banking sector remains resilient and
robust . Even if y ou look at the unsecured consumer loans and some segments
of personal loans , the numbers that we have before us are not particularly
alarming. The numbers are within reasonable limits . Even the NPA numbers
are also within reasonable limits . They have not really significantly gone up. But
what came to our notice were two or three points . One, as I mentioned in my
address , there was a kind of exuberance which we saw that was building up
and kind of a fear of missing out , what they call a FOMO approach also getting
in. This was one opportunity which everybody thought they w ould capitali se on.
In this process, what was happening was that every institution, whether it is a
bank or an  NBFC, has a certain management bandwidth to appraise proposals ,
to diligently examine a loan application.  Some of them have got model -based
lending and there are models which automatically generate sanction letters .
We saw that banks and certain NBFCs , as per our supervisory assessment , did
not have that kind of bandwidth  of diligence, bandwidth of doing due diligence
of the loan proposals to justify the kind of loan growth in these sectors that was
seen. It was very clear that going forward this kind of growth would not be
sustainable if it is not slightly moderated. So, we clearly smelt, saw and
anticipated some problems  ahead of us down the road. W e, therefore, acted
preemptively . Our approach is that , as I said in the last monetary policy , we do
not wait for the house to catch fire and then act. We would like to see where the fire is likely to  arise and act in time so that there is no fire in the house.
Moderator:
But, do you think that over the medium  term, we need to revisit  the whole
personal lending framework in regulated entities?
Shaktikanta Das:
It is for the banks to do it. H ow to do appraisal is not something which the
regulators should be telling the banks. Each bank  and each NBFC have their 2 internal capabilities. U ltimately, they are collecting depositor money ; they are
lending from that money. It is their responsibility  to do the appraisal . Our task ,
from time to time , as the coach or referee, whatever you call  it, this is one area
where perhaps you need to give a second look.
This model -based algorithm or model -based lending is one area where
currently we are looking at.  I have mentioned about it in one of the speeches
about a month ago also. The robustness of models  is something for the Bank
Management , Board of Directors , that includes NBFCs also , the audit
committees or the risk management committees of these financial entities to
see how robust are the algorithm s and how robust are the models.  The ground
realitie s keep on changing. W hether your model is falling behind the curve or it
is in tune with the times and what are the possible risks which the models can
create?  That is one area which we are closely studying now. But again, our
expectation is that the management of the banks, the boards of banks an d
NBFCs should themselves analy se and look at the possible riskiness or the
possible gaps which are there in their model -based, algorithm -based lending,
which can lead to a potential crisis.
Moderator:
In this area, you had listed the changes in the regulatory architecture and the
strengthening of the architecture. What other changes can we expect going
forward ?
Shaktikanta Das:
I would not like to announce anything prematurely. Once we are ready with a particular analysis, we immediately issue it.  In most of the cases, we issue it as
a draft circular and then finali se it. In c ertain situations, it is not possible to issue
a draft circular. We have to straight away issue the circular. It is situation-
specific. I would not like to make an announcement prematurely unless we are
fully convinced that this is something which needs regulatory  intervention.
Moderator:
How are you dealing with these  illegal lending apps , sir? You said the
Government and the RBI are  dealing with it. Are there any details which you
can share?
Shaktikanta Das:
We have collected the list of apps from all lenders regulated by RBI viz., banks
and NBFCs. The list has been furnished to Department of Financial Services
and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India.
It is a long list of the digital lending apps (DLAs) which are engaged by either the the banks/NBFCs themselves or third- party service providers which are
engaged by them (banks/NBFCs).  3 The responsibility is more for the law enforcement agencies to look at and
identify illegal apps. RBI does not regulate these apps. Since, we regulate only
banks and NBFCs, we have cast the responsibility on our regulated entities to
see that the fair Code of Conduct and fair business practices are adopted by
their third -party service providers. But the problem is with regard to the illegal
lending apps.
Whenever we come across any further problem of illegal lending apps, we bring it to the notice of law enforcement agencies. There is an active engagement
between the Reserve Bank, the concerned ministries, the Government of India
and the law enforcement agencies. These coordination meetings are held regularly between these agencies to take appropriate measures against the
illegal lending apps. There is growing awareness also among the people. We
have been doing a lot of media campaigns and awareness programmes to sensitise the public not to fall prey to any sort of apparently attractive- looking
loan or some other offerings.
Moderator:
Staying on the subject of FinTechs , you had said that after you have tightened
regulations ; PE money was still flowing into the industry. But the fact remains
that regulations are ti ght and many FinTechs  are still not in sight of profitability.
Does that worry you?
Shaktikanta Das:
Somebody who is doing business, it is for him to decide on his investment and
his tolerance level . Every business , whether it is a financial service sector
company or it is a manufacturing company or any other real sector company ,
cannot expect to see profit from day one.
It is for those fintech companies to identify how much of initial loss or how many
years of loss they can absor b. It is a question which they should be asking
themselves. Is the model adopted by them  risky or likely to create loss ? If it is
something which is loss -making, it is a question which they should answer
themselves, whether they should travel down that lane and at what speed.
So far as we are concerned, I would like to say that the digital lending apps, we
have not done anything. We have only put the responsibility on the bank
management to ensure that fair practices are followed by their lending apps.
We have also sensiti sed the bank s through our direct interaction that they must
also look at these lending algorithms and what you call model -based lending.
The digital  lending guidelines have been issued after wide consultation. I would
like to say very clearly that the digital lending guidelines have been well accepted.  4 Look at the FLDG  (First Loss Default Guarantee) . When we issued the digital
lending guidelines, ther e was a lot of clamo ur that we should also recogni se
FLDG. At that time, we clearly said that it wa s under examination and we w ould
consider it. Then we had extensive deliberations and consultations with the
actual players . The percentage,  which we have prescribed, is something which
came from their side,  and we examined it,  and we accepted it.
The fintech sector is growing. It will grow. The fintech sector, fintech lending
sector, and digital lending sector  will grow, but they need to grow in a
sustainable manner and that is our emphasis.
Moderator:
On a related note, with the success of UPI, there are also some murmurs that it has become a kind of monopoly. T here were some reports that the RBI is
looking to revive the idea of a new umbrella entity  kind of a competitor to this
NPCI. Any thoughts on that?
Shaktikanta Das:
NPCI is entrusted with our entire payment system and within that, the UPI is now treated as a digital public infrastructure. I t is open to all . Various apps like
Google Pay, PhonePe , the B HIM app, and any private entity can sort of onboard
into the UPI system and operate. So, it is a n open kind of platform . They have
to apply to NPCI and NPCI has to give them the necessary permission and onboard them. S o, UPI has become a digital public infrastructure and UPI
needs to grow. UPI has become an international model to be emulated by other
countries. During G20 under India's presidency, there was wide appreciation
and recognition of the fact that UPI is the l eader in payment systems across the
world.  Both RBI and NPCI  are in discussion with a number of countries to assist
them in developing similar payment systems in their country and to integrate
them  with our UPI . Singapore has already done it. We have alrea dy signed an
MoU with the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates. There are a few other
countries in our region with whom the discussions and the talks are at  various
advanced stages . We are ready from our side. Once they are ready, we would
like to integrate.
UPI is now positioned in a place where it is a public infrastructure,  and it has to
make its presence felt. So, UPI needs to grow and that is the first aspect I will
say. I would not look it as a monopoly becaus e it is a kind of thing that anybody
can come and play with that. It is based on the principle of public -private
partnership. The success of UPI , in a large measure,  also owes a lot to the
private sector payment players who have onboarded into UPI . Companies have
had a major role. We want to position UPI as a digital public infrastructure. It is
an open platform. It is available to all and that should grow . It is the best system
in the world and should become a world leader in facilitating similar payment 5 systems in other countries and also help in developing and improving the cross -
border payments that we have.
Now, you are referring to the new umbrella entity. We got some proposals.
There were many applications . Most of the proposals were just a replication of
what the NPCI was already doing. What we were looking for are  some new
innovative methods, some new, some innovative, some value addition to our
payment systems, which we did not see. H aving said that, we will take an  official
view o n this matter  then we will make the necessary announcements as and
when we take the official view.
Moderator:
Yesterday , the US Securities and Exchange Commission allowed exchange-
traded funds track ing these cryptocurrencies . So, I would like to know, does this
give some legitimacy to cryptocurrencies? Now, will this influence regulatory
thinking across the world? I mean, what is your view?  Shaktikanta Das:
The US capital market regulators in that same announcement  have also issued
necessary cautionary advice and if I can say , warning to the investors  to be
careful, so pointed about the riskiness of the whole thing. T he capital market
regulator in the US is fully aware of the risks that it poses. Our position, my
position and RBI’s position on this whole crypto thing remains unc hanged
irrespective of who does what . Just because somebody is doing something, we
are not here to emulate them . We will know that especially  for emerging market
economies and I would say the same would apply to advanced economies also.
Traveling down that path will create huge risks which,  going forward, will be
very, very difficult to contain.
The question arises, why do you need to travel down that road? What is it that
you get out of it? It is the speculative nature of that product  which enables some
people to make perhaps big money  for some time, but the majority of people
are not going to make big money for all time. In fact, the majority of people will
encounter losses because it is an entirely s peculative product. I do  not wish to
comment on what another  regulator of another country has done. I would not
like to comment on that because they know what is best for their country and
accordingly , they have acted. B ut I would like to  say two things. Firstly, they
themselves have flagged the riskiness of the products and advised people to
be very careful. S econdly, I would like to say that we are all familiar with the
term, the tulip mania in the Netherlands which built up into a big asset bubble
and then it collapsed. So, I do not think the world and in particular the emerging
market economies can afford a crypto mania which will lead to similar
outcomes.
6 Moderator:
Governor, can we take a coupl e of questions from the audience please? Please
keep it short . That gentleman in the front.
Anirudh Gupta:
I am Anirudh Gupta. Sir, I have a question on the debt markets . Would the
addition of ₹1.5 lakh limit which is there under the 80C provision of the Income
Tax, under the debt funds deepen the debt markets  in your view?
Shaktikanta Das:
It is a G overnment tax issue. The budget is expected in less than 20 days. It is
not fair for me to comment on that in public.
Neerav:
Hi. I am Neerav. I have a question around CBDC. Recently , we crossed an
important milestone in terms of daily transactions, i.e., 1 million odd
transactions per day. How do you view the road map going ahead in terms of
CBDC adoption ? How is the use case panning out  for wholesale CBDC?
Shaktikanta Das:
In wholesale,  we started with the G -sec segment, both in the secondary market
as well as in the primary auctions. Now we are moving towards money market
operations , overnight call money market s. We are trying to ensure CBDC
utilisation in that area. S lowly we will be adding new segments or new areas
where CBDC operations we will do.  Let us remember that it  is a pilot project
and we are in no great hurry because after all we are creating a new currency system,  and we hav e to be very careful about the integrity and the safety of the
CBDC that we are creating. So, we are being very careful. There is no target
date as such. We are moving very cautiously , but with the learnings that we are
getting,  we are trying to utili se and further fine -tune our system. I n the wholesale
segment , we will be expanding its scope slowly and steadily.
Coming to retail, there have been many learning s. We are working on the
possibility of programmability in CBDC, for example, the Government cash
transfers to farmers or other segments . Whenever there is a direct benefit
transfer or a cas h transfer, you program it in such a manner that the CBDC
which is transferred to the wallets of the beneficiary, is utilis ed only for that
purpose, i.e.,  where the end use is clearly defined by the person who is sending
the money. T hat is one area where we are working.
Recently we have made UPI and CBDC interoperable.  You can use your UPI
payment system , you can use the CBDC wallet also, and you can use the same
QR code. S lowly , there are many learnings which are coming up. There are few
countries in the world which are in the pilot mode and there is a lot of interest
from other countries also in our CBDC system. So, CBDC in times to come  is 7 the future currency system and in particular , CBDC will make cross -border
payments much faster much more efficient and less expensive.  CBDC,  we are
using the blockchain. We will go for the di stributed ledger technology ( DLT)
method.  So, to the critics of th e RBI's view on cryptocurrency , let me say that
we firmly believe that the technology of blockchain has its merits . It can be used
and it is already being used by many companies even in India such as  the
logistics providers , maintenance of land records , the land registration records .
There are huge opportunities available in blockchain technology per se. B ut the
technology does not need a product called cryptocurrency to grow. W e are
using blockchain, for example, in C BDC. We will be using the DLT model also,
but it  is a huge opportunity and that  is going to be the future currency system
and we need to be there.
Neil Borate:
Sir, this is Neil Borate.  I am a Deputy Editor at Mint. The mutual fund industry 's
overseas investment limit of US $7 billion has not  been raised by the R BI. All
funds were stopped from investing fresh money overseas from February 1,
2022 and in fact, this limit of US$ 7 billion was set in 2008 as far back as that.
Now US$7 billion is a tiny blip in our Forex reserves of more than US$ 600
billion . So, what is the RBI's stance on this? Why should this not be raised?
Shaktikanta Das:
This request has been coming to us from the mutual fund industry from time to
time. We have just come out of the pressure on our currency  which we
witnessed in the aftermath of the  starting of the Ukraine war. From February
2022 onwards, the R upee exchange rate was under a lot of pressure. Initially ,
there were a lot of outflows. So, it  is a question of timing. W e do not question
the basis of their request. It  is a question of the right time for us to do it. We
have just come out of the stress on the exchange rate of the Rupee. We
experienced huge outflows. Now things have stabili sed, and the R upee has
remained very stable. Of course, some people read it wrongly and call it a
stabilis ed arrangement. But it is not stabili sed. It is market- determined. If
somebody wishes to call it stabilis ed, so be it.
In the description of the Indian rupee as a stabi lised arrangement , the
fundamental strength of the Indian rupee is being missed out . They are, the
strength of the macroeconomic fundamentals of the Indian economy, the resilience of the Indian financial system , the return of inflows into India, FPI
inflows in particular . FDI inflows this year are less than what it was last year ,
but given that the global FDI volumes have gone down, in that , India's share is
one of the bigger  ones.  So, these are the points which are being missed out.
Our exchange rate system, our economy today is not what it was a few years
ago. But that is beside the point.  8 Coming specifically to your question, I  am not questioning the genuineness of
their demand. It  is a question of timing. When we feel confident  that things are,
it has to be stable on a durable basis. It is already stable. We will take the call
at the right time.
Moderator:
One last thing I would like to ask.  I do not know whether you would like to
answer it. Do you expect the pre- election budget to be inflationary?
Shaktikanta Das:
No, it will not be. That is one thing I can tell you.  I do not have any insi de
information about what the Government will do, what the Finance Ministry will
do on the budget, what the Finance Minister will do on the budget. But, going by the past  track record  and going by the kind of measures the G overnment
has been taking in recent months  right after the inflation started rising and it hit
7.8% after the Ukraine war . The Government has been taking several  supply -
side measures . Particularly in recent weeks and months, a number of supply -
side measures have been taken. So, what comes out very clearly is that the
Government  is very particular that inflation should be brought down and there
is appreciation of the fact that  supply -side measures can be done only by the
Government.
The s econd thing is that our fiscal has not fueled inflation in India. Unlike in
many other countries, where a huge amount of liquidity was injected into the
system . Even pre-COVID, it was there. B ut during COVID, the kind of huge
liquidity that was injected is still sitting out there and circulating somewhere.
The liquidity injection also fueled inflation. In India, that did not happen. From
the monetary policy side, the liquidity which we gave w as for limited periods
which have come back to us and we have also been pulling out liquidity. On the fiscal side, the fiscal support that  the G overnment provided during the COVID
times and thereafter was also targeted,  and it was very calibrated and did not
fuel inflation. I have talked about it at length outside. So, going by the past track
record, there is no reason to believe that any announcement s in the budget
would be inflationary.
Moderator:
Thank you S ir. Ladies and gentlemen, Governor Shakt ikanta Das.