1 Edited Transcript of the Governor ’s Conversation with NDTV India at the
World Economic Forum  2024 , Davos on January 1 8, 2024
Vishnu Som:
One of the most important announcements which have been made over the last couple
of days at the World Economic Forum and on the sidelines here in Davos, Switzerland, is the India Growth Story . There is nobody better placed to talk about growth in India
than the RBI Governor . Mr. Shaktikanta Das has joined us now. Thank  you very much
for being with us . Sir, 7%  is extremely optimistic ; it is in line , of course, with what some
of the global projections are. What are some of the sectors driving this growth?
Shaktikanta Das:
You are talking about  the current year or next year ?
Vishnu Som:
2024- 25.
Shaktikanta Das:
Let me start by saying that India has recovered from the recent volatilities and the
uncertainties and challenges , multiple turmoil one after the other , health crisis followed
by all these geopolitical  crises. India has emerged out of it a lot better. Our
macroeconomic stability is far better than in most other  countries . Our financial sector
is also doing well . When we said 7% growth for the current year it looked optimistic
but as you know the National Statistical Office (NSO) has given a number of 7.3% .
Now talking of 2024- 25, I made a  statement in some other forum  yesterday that I have
a sense that the economy will touch a real GDP growth of 7% next year. I said this on
the basis of the overall macroeconomic conditions prevailing in the country. The
momentum of economic activities remains  very positive  and we have reasons to
believe that this momentum will be maintained well into next year and beyond. I have made a statement also that India has now entered into a period of gross long haul and economic activities are holding their ground,  the momentum of economic activity is
maintained , aggregate demand conditio ns are remaining positive , investment activity
has started picking up backed by the continued high capital expenditure by the
Government . Private sector capital expenditure is also picking up and the agriculture
sector in the current year and also expected  to do better in the next year. So,  with all
these confluences of factors  and with a lot of activity  also happening with regard to
investment in the new age technologies like fintech and startups and technology -2 based activities all that gives us the confidence to say that next year the growth would
be touching about 7% .
Vishnu Som:
So, inflation at about  4.5% that is what you are projecting?
Shaktikanta Das:
Yes, n ext year’s average inflation is expected to remain at  4.5% . Our headline inflation,
immediately after the Ukraine war, had touched 7.8% . Thereafter, because of the
Monetary Policy actions taken by the Reserve Bank coupled with the supply -side
measures taken by the G overnment , inflation has been steadily coming down and we
are on our way to reach the 4% target . But next year's average is expected to be 4.5%.
The positive aspect of it is that our inflation is now well within the target band of
inflation, but we are not satisfied with that. We would like our inflation to reach 4% and
remain around 4% , that is our endeavour . The core inflation i s now  marginally below
the 4% headline target. So,  we expect the next year's average inflation to be 4.5% .
Inflation to steadily moderate t owards 4%.
Vishnu Som:
Sir, what are the areas of concern presently ? In the Red Sea scenario, there are
attacks  which  are taking place,  and India's maritime supply lines are through those
waters to a large extent. Is this an area of potential concern?
Shaktikanta Das:
There are lots of  global uncertainties  and you just mentioned some of them . These are
new flashpoints in global  geopolitics. As we stand today, India is quite well -placed to
deal with this challenge. How these Red Sea area conflicts and how the movement of
ships, etc., are going to pan out are things which have to be watched and monitored.
I think various national governments, including India,  are doing their best to see that
the movement of our ships  or ships coming towards India is  not disrupted.
Vishnu Som:
And the final question  Sir. In the last couple of days , we have seen lots of interesting
conversations, for example, on artificial intelligence and also on the overall state of the
world economy . India remains a clear  outlier.
Shaktikanta Das:
At the general systemic level , there is a lot of interest in India. India is an outlier in the
sense that the rest of the world is not witnessing contraction. The rest of the world has 3 escaped the earlier apprehensions of a hard landing,  but global growth and individual
country growth have slowed. In the middle of all this, India is recording 7%  plus growth.
Inflation in most countries as in India has moderated but in every country  including
India, we are yet to reach our target levels. That is an area which receives our
continued focus . I would like to mention two points where my interaction with people
from other countries  shows there is a lot of interest in  the fintechs, how the technology
sectors , how the startups are doing in India. There are a lot of questions about t he
Central Bank digital currency  (CBDC) , which we have launched the e -Rupee which is
based on blockchain technology and what has been our experience?  How do we see
this and what is its  potential, how we are going about it ? There is a lot of interest
around the C BDC of the Reserve Bank of India. There is a lot of interest in  UPI.
Countries are asking questions . They would like to have it in their countries. So,  there
is a lot of interest in the area of technology, in fintech, in payment systems . These are
areas where conventionally there was not so much interest on India but this time
around I find that there is a lot of interest i n these areas.
Vishnu Som:
So, thank you very much for speaking to us .
That is the RBI governor talking to us, telling us among other things, where India's
GDP growth is projected to be for 2024- 25, the inflation numbers are much better now ,
and things are coming out of the COVID situation we saw, but also a great deal of
interest over here in Davos, Switzerland.